   #Zelda Universe » Hyrule: A Geography and Cartography Comments Feed
   JSON oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML) Podcast RSS feed

   [ ]
     * [zu-logo-horizontal.svg]
     * Media
     * Features
     * Games
     * Forums
     * Zelda Maps
     * Zelda Wiki

   [ ]
   Login or register
   ____________________
   [ ]
     * Facebook Facebook
     * Instagram Instagram
     * Tiktok Tiktok
     * Twitter Twitter
     * Threads Threads
     * BlueSky BlueSky
     * Tumblr Tumblr
     * YouTube YouTube
     * Twitch Twitch
     * Discord Discord
     * Patreon Patreon

   Latest Articles

Hyrule: A Geography and Cartography

   By Bastian on May 8, 2010

                a part of The Missing Link series of articles
                             Article By Bastian

   In nearly every The Legend of Zelda video game we explore a vast
   landscape, usually called “Hyrule”, and yet no two Hyrules are ever
   identical.

   Are we meant to believe that Hyrule is constantly suffering cataclysmic
   natural disasters which are dramatically changing its features? Or are
   we to assume that there are many different lands all called Hyrule
   within the same world? Or possibly worlds? Or should we believe that
   somehow all of these lands called Hyrule are in fact one in the same?

   I fancy the latter, myself, and my aim is to show how this can be
   possible, despite the contrasting popular opinion.

In the Beginning…

   Let’s travel back in time to the beginning, to the earliest
   documentation of this magical land. In the instruction manual for The
   Legend of Zelda, it indicates that this game takes place “in a little
   kingdom in the land of Hyrule.” As we discover in the direct sequel,
   Zelda II: The Adventure of Link, such a description couldn’t be more
   accurate. In this sequel we are presented with a tiny representation of
   the vast landscape we traversed in the first game. Clearly we are to
   believe that Hyrule as we knew it in The Legend of Zelda is but one
   tiny piece of a grand land.

   Comparing LoZ Hyrule to AoL Hyrule

   I assert that nearly every video game that takes place within “Hyrule”
   actually takes place within the same vague area of Hyrule seen in The
   Legend of Zelda.

A Story and a Map

   In each Zelda video game we are provided with two important documents:
   a legend regarding the history preceding the story of the game, usually
   entitled “Story,” and a rough map of the geography that Link will
   discover in that particular adventure.

   Sometimes these two artifacts are very accurate and detailed in
   accordance with the particular adventure at hand, but more often than
   not these documents are so vague that they border on impressionistic.

   Take, for instance, the original The Legend of Zelda: in the
   instruction manual we are presented with a highly detailed clay
   representation of the landscape matching almost identically the
   geography we see in the 8-bit game.

   The Legend of Zelda's Hyrule

   Now consider the map provided in Ocarina of Time: while it
   unquestionably gives an accurate notion of the geography, it is by no
   means one-to-one indentical.

   Ocarina of Time's Map

   Are we then to believe that The Legend of Zelda’s blocky clay map of
   Hyrule is more accurate than Ocarina’s merely because it better matches
   the in-game landscape of its game? Certainly not. It would be absurd to
   believe that geometric series of square features could ever naturally
   exist as a landscape. We must then assume that “Hyrule” as depicted in
   The Legend of Zelda is an impression, only. If we take both the
   instruction manual map and in-game landscape as impressionistic for The
   Legend of Zelda, why then should we take any other representation of
   Hyrule any more literally?

   In The Adventure of Link we are presented with two seperate maps, both
   rather vague when it comes to comparing the landscape with that
   presented in the videogame, and yet very different each from the other.

   The two maps in the instruction manual for AoL

   I take this varying degree of vagueness in the hand-drawn cartography,
   along with the “legendary” verbage of the prehistory provided as
   “story” (but that’s another topic for another time) as the key to this
   controversial approach to the accuracy of Hyrule’s geography in
   comparison to its cartographies.

   Many insist that all of these Hyrules cannot possibly be the same
   Hyrule because the geography is wildly changing and transforming
   between games. I assert that the geography is not changing at all (or,
   at least not all that dramatically). The actual problem instead stems
   from the degree of accuracy of the cartography presented both in-game
   and via the map provided.

Ancient Maps of Earth

   When we consider antique maps of our own world, we are often surprised
   at the shapes and sizes of the continents. We wonder at the seemingly
   arbitrary position of the major geographic features we are all so
   familiar with. How can they have thought North America was so tiny? Why
   is China shaped like a boomerang? Where is Greenland?

   Antique Earth Maps

   These antique maps display vastly different shapes and sizes of
   landmasses than we know today. Why the dramatic difference? We know, of
   course, that these continents and their features have not radically
   transformed since that era. The true transformation is found in the
   improved accuracy of cartography tools and theories. When we look at
   these antique maps and see the shapes and proportions and
   complete juxtaposition of features we do not assume we are looking at a
   different Earth. No, we understand that these are simply archaic
   understandings of what Earth was thought to look like at that time.

All Hyrules Are One Hyrule

   The notion that each game takes place in a different Hyrule is as
   absurd to me as the Columbus-era idea that the Americas were actually
   the Orient. Clearly each videogame deals with the same continents
   collectively known as “Hyrule.”

   The majority of the Zelda games take place in the region I term
   “Southern Hyrule.” Beginning with the original The Legend of Zelda,
   then A Link to the Past, Ocarina of Time, The Wind Waker, The Minish
   Cap, Four Swords/Adventures, and Twilight Princess. Even The Adventure
   of Link utilizes “Southern Hyrule,” albeit limitedly in a miniturized
   rendition to give scope to the vastness of what I term “Northern
   Hyrule” (the land just north of Death Mountains) and “Eastern Hyrule”
   (the continent to the east of North/South Hyrule). It is my belief that
   Phantom Hourglass also takes place in a flooded Northern and Eastern
   Hyrule.

   Three Continents of Hyrule

   So how can all these different landscapes be one and the same when
   their geographies are so extremely different? It is because we are
   intended to take these cartographies with a grain of salt. Sometimes it
   is as simple as “up is NOT north, north is to the right” (as is the
   case in The Minish Cap).

   Similarly: with Ocarina of Time we find north to have shifted about 45
   degrees counter-clockwise. As long as we orient Death Mountain at the
   top of the map, we find the basic major features orient themselves in
   roughly the same areas.

   A Link to the Past vs. Ocarina of Time

   The only thing changing in the geographies is the cartographer’s
   understanding or impression of it. It is then unsuprising when we take
   a simplified snapshot of a portion of Southern Hyrule in each of these
   cartographies that we always find the Death Mountain(s) to the north,
   Hyrule Castle just south of that, an enormous lake to the east, and an
   equally large desert to the west.

   Comparing the Hyrules

The Moving Village and Castle

   What of Kakariko Village? It seems to be leaping about the landscape
   wildly. If the other major geographic features are fairly static
   map-to-map why then does it seem as if Kakariko and Hyrule Castle can
   never stay in the same place in each game? This can be explained in two
   very different ways:
    1. As these maps are highly impressionistic, the village remains in
       the same place throughout history, but each cartographer’s notion
       of where it existed is different (consider legendary Camelot and
       the debate concerning the three different argued locations of
       Cadbury, Camelford, and Caerleon).
    2. The Kakariko Village presented in Ocarina of Time has been
       destroyed/deserted (and thus is the “hidden town” found in Twilight
       Princess) with a New Kakariko having been built further west.

   Along that same line: could it also be possible that an earlier Hyrule
   Castle (presented in Ocarina of Time) has been destroyed at some point
   prior to Twilight Princess, with a new Hyrule Castle having been built
   farther east, closer to where Lon Lon Ranch once stood? If so, this
   could explain the ruins found all throughout Twilight Princess‘ Lost
   Woods, including the ruins of the Temple of Time. Later, then, we would
   find that these are the same Lost Woods found in A Link to the Past and
   that the only thing left of the ruins of the Temple of Time is the dias
   and pedestal where Link discovers the Master Sword. In this A Link to
   the Past-era Hyrule, Kakariko now stands just south of the ruins of the
   Temple of Time/Lost Woods… precicely where the ancient Hyrule Castle
   from Ocarina-era stood.

   Then again, perhaps these are all simply misinterpretations or slightly
   different notions according to each cartographer.

The True Map

   So which of all the maps is the most accurate? That remains to be seen.
   Perhaps they are each equally accurate/inaccurate. Or maybe it stands
   to reason that the most recent telling (Twilight Princess) is the most
   accurate; as our Nintendo staff cartographers’ tools (advancement of
   realism of graphics) improve, so too does the accuracy of the
   geography. If the rumors of Eiji Aonuma’s desire to release a 3D A Link
   to the Past ever comes to fruition, it will be exciting to see how this
   cartography compares to that of it’s 16-bit predecesor.

   One thing remains certain, however: regardless of its geography, Hyrule
   never ceases to prove full of fun and adventure. And, really, that’s
   all that matters in the end.

Bastian

     * More articles by Bastian
     *
     *
     *

   Continue the discussion with other Zelda fans on social media!
     * Forums
     * Discord
     * Facebook
     * Twitter

Recent Articles

     * Bombers’ Notebook: Stray Fairies (Four Swords)
     * Zelda podcasts start the new year with new seasons!
     * Blue underdog finally wins race after almost 25 years
     * Tetra’s Treasures: The 2025 ‘Zelda’ Calendar
     * AGDQ speedrunners will play several Zelda games next week to help
       prevent cancer

Zelda-themed Enamel Pins

   Use code ZU at checkout for a discount! Your discount helps support
   Zelda Universe.

Related Articles

     * Skelux_LoZMinusWorld_Screenshot_2 "Minus World" discovered in the
       original Legend of Zelda
     * guides-cadence-of-hyrule Cadence of Hyrule
     * Classic LoZ The original Zelda takes place on Death Mountain,
       confirms Zelda Encyclopedia
     * 2022031116112100_s Tingle's Maps: Islands at the edge of the world
     * hyrule warriors We're celebrating 5 years of Hyrule Warriors with
       related articles this week

   [INS: :INS]

   Zelda Universe

   Site Links
     * About
     * Contact Us
     * Team
     * Volunteer
     * Merchandise
     * Spoiler Policy
     * Privacy Policy

   More by ZU
     * Zelda Maps
     * Zelda Wiki

   Social Media
     * YouTube
     * Twitch
     * Discord
     * Facebook
     * Instagram
     * TikTok
     * Threads
     * BlueSky
     * Twitter
     * Tumblr
     * Patreon

   © 2001-2025 Zelda Universe

   Login Close

   Conversations
   Display All
   Notifications
   Display All
   Moderation

   [avatar-default.svg]

Forum Post Title

   Username - 1 hour ago - Post
   Display All
   Friends Online
   Display All

   Quantcast

   [p?c1=2&c2=6036161&cv=2.0&cj=1]
