   #Syndiquer tout le site

   Accueil
   Encyclopédie internationale
   des histoires de l’anthropologie

   en fr

   Présentation Que veut dire Bérose ? Comité éditorial et conseil
   scientifique Auteurs Bérose / Liste des contributions Mentions légales
   / Licence & Soutiens Partenaires Équipes de recherche Encyclopédie
   Ethnographes et anthropologues Institutions et revues anthropologiques
   Concepts, objets et traditions anthropologiques Publications Les
   Carnets de Bérose Autres publications Bérose Rencontres Interviews

     * Présentation
     * Équipes de recherche
     * Encyclopédie
     * Publications
     * Rencontres
     * Interviews
     * Recherche

   NEWSLETTER
   S'ABONNER
   Recherche

   > Ethnographes et anthropologues  > Sébillot, Paul (1843-1918)

   Legendary Places: Oral History and Folk Geography in Nineteenth-Century
   Brittany
   David Hopkin

   Hertford College, University of Oxford
   2010

   Pour citer cet article

   Hopkin, David, 2010. “Legendary Places: Oral History and Folk Geography
   in Nineteenth-Century Brittany”, in Bérose - Encyclopédie
   internationale des histoires de l'anthropologie, Paris.

   URL Bérose : article477.html

   Télécharger en pdf

   Publié dans le cadre du thème de recherche «Réseaux, revues et sociétés
   savantes en France et en Europe (1870-1920)», dirigé par Claudie
   Voisenat (Ministère de la Culture, Héritages) et Jean-Christophe
   Monferran (CNRS, Héritages).

   Folklore and “local colour”

   There is a story that when Alexandre Dumas’ play Christine was banned,
   shortly before the 1830 Revolution, Dumas went to plead his case to the
   académicien and censor Charles Brifaut. Brifaut suggested what seemed
   to him minor alterations, such as the sex of the protagonist, and
   mentioned that under the First Empire he had been obliged to do much
   the same. A play of his set in Spain was considered too inflammatory
   given the Emperor’s difficulties in that country, so he changed some
   names and locations, and transformed it into Ninus II, an acceptable
   drama of ancient Babylon. Dumas exclaimed : “But really, Monsieur
   Brifaut, the local colour !” Brifaut smiled and replied “Monsieur, in
   our time, for us, local colour had not yet been invented.” [1]

   Brifaut’s cynicism is echoed by many contemporary historians. Dumas was
   shocked because Brifaut had, in his opinion, sacrificed the
   authenticity of the work : what was true of Spain could not also be
   true of Babylon. But for post-modern historians, trained to unpick
   “invented traditions” and “imagined communities”, the Romantics’
   yearning for authenticity has itself become suspect. [2] The whole
   nineteenth-century enterprise of defining cultural difference through
   nation-building, imperial exploration and social investigation, can be
   seen in retrospect as a fabrication in which the self-serving
   taxonomies of elites were imposed on suspect data. The academic
   subjects built on this concern for explaining difference _ history,
   sociology, and anthropology _ have likewise had their credentials as
   social sciences severely weakened. [3] But the subject which has
   suffered most by the retreat into “reflexivity” is folklore. Pioneer
   sociologists and anthropologists may have been keen to collect and
   classify, but from the start folklorists saw themselves in a more
   active role, reviving threatened traditions. The issue of authenticity
   was always, therefore, of greater significance to folklore. [4]

   For romantics like Dumas, an enthusiastic reader and translator of the
   Grimms, folklore was all about local colour. The subject had been born
   out of an assertion of cultural difference, in reaction to the
   universalist ambitions of the Enlightenment. Johann Gottfried Herder
   (1744-1803) put its case most clearly : what was true and good for
   France was alien to Germany, for each nation had, over centuries,
   developed its own unique traditions, ideally suited to the character of
   its people. The essence of this unique culture, what Herder called the
   “folk-soul”, was expressed in language and in particular in folk-song
   and tale. No one person could claim authorship of ballads, they were
   the communal, almost unconscious creation of the nation as a whole.
   Every singer was connected to the collective body of the nation, and
   simultaneously to their ancestors, from whom they had inherited this
   traditional lore. [5]

   This is a well-known story, but there is one point that I would like to
   emphasise. Herder believed that the origins of cultural difference lay
   in the environment : “Nature has sketched with the mountain ranges she
   formed and with the rivers she made flow from them the rough but
   definite outline of the entire history of man… Oceans, mountain chains,
   and rivers are the most natural boundaries not only of lands, but also
   of peoples, customs, languages, and empires.” [6] The customs of each
   nation had been shaped by the landscape in which they lived. Folklore
   was not just the expression of a people and its history, but of the
   land itself. Thus the Grimms were able to describe the tales collected
   from their their principal informants, Dorothea Viehmann (the so-called
   Märchenfrau of Niederzwehren) and “Old Marie”, as “authentically
   Hessian” and “originally Hessian”. [7] Emile Souvestre (1806-1854), a
   romantic poet and one of the earliest imitators of the Grimms in
   France, expressed this connection between story and geography in an
   environmental cliché when introducing his 1844 collection Le Foyer
   breton : “we have only published those [folktales] which exhale that
   smell of the land which cannot be imitated.” [8] More than a hundred
   years later, the compiler of the French folktale index, Paul Delarue,
   echoed this sentiment : “in France as in the other countries
   [folktales] have through the course of the centuries been subjected to
   the influence of the physical and human environment, of the particular
   genius of the race ; and they have acquired characteristics that are
   unique.” [9]

   These unique characteristics might be obvious to collectors, able to
   compare and contrast the narrative tradition of many communities, but
   it is questionable whether they could have been identified by the
   narrators of folktales. Folklorists seldom asked their informants where
   they thought their stories originated but Ariane de Félice, who
   conducted fieldwork in the marshland of the Loire estuary after the
   Second World War, was the exception. She was told “They must have been
   more intelligent than most, the guys who invented this… You won’t find
   that here. They come perhaps from the depths of England, or I don’t
   know where.” [10] Their exotic quality was indeed part of the tales’
   attraction. None of her narrators, who all came from the one village,
   suggested that there was anything particularly Breton about their
   tales, and yet Félice’s book was entitled Contes de Haute-Bretagne. To
   this day it is almost impossible to find a folktale collection which
   does not claim to be in some way expressive of a region or nation. The
   primacy of collective identities, be they ethnic, cultural or
   geographic, is the legacy bequeathed by romantic nationalism to
   folklore.

   Folk wisdom, however, recognised the ease with which songs and stories
   were diffused around the globe, and this has been understood at a
   scholarly level also. Delarue catalogued the French folktales according
   to the international index of tale-types. The tale of Cinderella is
   tale-type 510, and one can go to the folktale catalogue of any country
   from China to the Caribbean and find examples of tales that fit this
   typology. [11] The story was popular in France, but not specific to
   France. The same is true of other genres of folklore : whether we are
   talking of riddles, proverbs, legends, or folksongs, it is difficult to
   find examples limited to just one region or one nation. They all have
   analogues in other countries. Delarue knew this, his argument was that
   the way Cinderella was told in France was characteristically French.
   For example, it lacked the cruelty and overt moralising that he
   associated with German tales. [12] And it is true that while Cinderella
   was moreorless universally known, the tale was never told exactly the
   same way in different places. But was this variation a reflection of
   national or regional cultural difference, or did it have more to do
   with the sex of the narrators, their occupations and personalities, or
   the personalities of the collectors ?

   This last is the most serious charge for it threatens not only to deny
   folklore’s claims to reveal specific cultures, but to undermine the
   entire collecting project. What if folklorists, as collectors and
   editors, shaped the final work to fit ideological agendas of their
   own ? This is indeed the accusation levelled at Emile Souvestre, and
   even more so at his contemporary, Théodore Hersart de la Villemarqué
   (1815-1895). The publication in 1839 of Villemarqué’s Barzaz-Breiz _
   Breton Ballads _ had an impact in France akin to MacPherson’s Ossian.
   Unfortunately there were other parallels. Villemarqué was a Breton
   patriot who wanted to endow his homeland with an epic literature to
   rival that of any nation. He was also an aristocrat, a conservative and
   a Catholic, and the Breton nation he envisioned was pious, deferential,
   and static, preserved by its language and traditions from the taint of
   revolutionary modernity. The ballads he “discovered” suited all these
   purposes admirably. Although he styled himself as the “collector and
   translator” of the Breton ballads, the suspicion arose that he was in
   fact their author. [13]
   The Querelle over the authenticity of the Barzaz-Breiz, which irrupted
   in 1867, continues to rumble on, but a prevailing, albeit erroneous,
   judgement in academic circles is that Villemarqué’s ballads, like
   MacPherson’s fragments, were forgeries. [14]

   Villemarqué is not the only nineteenth-century folklorist to fall under
   the critical spot-light not least because many French folklorists were
   likewise aligned with the Catholic, Royalist right. Their desire to
   establish a connection between the land and its people through its
   folklore has been seen as a defensive ploy by traditional elites,
   landowners and clerics, in the face of rural depopulation, social
   mobility and radical political upheaval. It is not just that
   folklorists were local patriots with regionalist or autonomist
   objectives, though many were, but it is also a question of the kind of
   country or region they were patriotic about. Why in France, for
   example, did practically every folklorist reject the administrative
   boundaries created by the Revolution, _ the departments _ in favour of
   collecting the folklore of the Old Regime provinces, such as Lorraine,
   Franche-Comté, Normandy… ? The implicit or explicit explanation is that
   the provinces represented genuine cultural units, but there is
   sometimes at least the hint of counter-revolutionary nostalgia. [15]
   Folklorists at the end of the nineteenth century claimed that theirs
   was an objective science with its own vigorous methodology. But the
   suspicion among academics today is that folklore was less the creation
   of the “folk” than the imposition derived from political and aesthetic
   movements among déraciné intellectuals.

   The implications of such revisionism are not limited to folklore. With
   the development of social history since the 1960s, historians have
   mined folklore collections to uncover the hidden lives of the popular
   classes, developing such explanatory schemas as popular religion,
   popular medicine, and popular culture. [16] Yet recently all these
   categories have been dismissed as constructions derived from the
   discourses of nineteenth-century elites. Even the very concept of
   “peasant” has been called into question. [17] What, for the last
   quarter of a century, has been the most influential approach to
   nineteenth-century rural France _ Eugen Weber’s history of the
   acculturation of regional and traditional societies in the process of
   transforming Peasants into Frenchmen _ crumbles, if the very categories
   of peasant, tradition and region were nothing more than the ideological
   projections of nation-builders. [18] As a consequence the peasants who
   seemed to speak to us from the pages of folklore collections have been
   once more condemned to historical marginality, for their voices will
   always be hidden behind the discourses of the dominant.

   I am unwilling to accept this conclusion, and the remainder of this
   paper will attempt to show that nineteenth-century folklorists were
   basically correct in proposing a connection between cultural traditions
   and a particular community, and that the relationship between the land
   and the lore was suggested to them by their informants, rather than
   imposed on them. This does not mean that I think folklorists always
   correctly identified what that connection was, and in the case of
   France the largely unreflecting use of pre-revolutionary provincial
   titles is unhelpful. But mislabelling should not prevent us realising
   what folklorists intuitively grasped, that there was a link between the
   stories they heard and the landscapes in which they were told. To
   demonstrate this I will call on the collection made by Paul Sébillot
   (1843-1918) between 1879 and 1885 in and around the village of
   Saint-Cast, near to Saint-Malo on the north Breton coast.

   Paul Sébillot and the storytellers of Saint-Cast

   Although Paul Sébillot was the dominant figure in French folklore
   studies at the end the nineteenth century, he did not conform to the
   stereotype of the Breton traditionalist. He was certainly no pious
   aristocrat like Villemarqué, and it is worth mentioning that, despite
   the supposed inherent conservatism of folklorists, in Brittany at least
   it was as much an enthusiasm of the left. Emile Souvestre had stood as
   a Republican candidate in 1849, while leading contemporaries of
   Sébillot included François-Marie Luzel and Adolphe Orain, both editors
   of Republican newspapers. [19] Sébillot was born at Matignon
   (Côtes-du-Nord) in 1843, the son of a doctor and a Republican
   activist. [20] He inherited his father’s politics, writing a popular
   pamphlet in 1875 entitled La République, c’est la tranquilité, which
   Luzel translated into Breton. [21] He married the sister of the
   economist and Republican politician Yves Guyot, who as editor of Le
   Siècle was a well-known advocate of radical causes from Dreyfus to
   feminism. Yet despite his Republican and anticlerical affiliations, in
   other ways Sébillot was true to the folklorist type. He was a member of
   a well-educated and well connected bourgeois family ; a rival
   folklorist would later accuse him of abusing his position as
   “châtelain” to make his collections. [22] He was also a déraciné,
   having settled in Paris, first as a law student, and then as an artist
   and writer. Folklore, at least initially, had been the exiled
   Sébillot’s tribute to his homeland. His local patriotism had been fired
   by a borrowed copy of Souvestre’s Le Foyer breton while a homesick
   schoolboy in 1860. In his memoirs Sébillot recalled that “the idea came
   to me to discover… if there were in my native land, marvellous or
   fantastic stories worthy of inclusion in a Gallo Hearth.” [23] But what
   attracted Sébillot most about Souvestre’s book were the illustrations,
   for he was already nursing artistic ambitions. From 1867 to 1880 he
   pursued a career as a painter. As the art critic for various Republican
   journals in the 1870s, and a visitor to Pont-Aven, Sébillot presumably
   knew of the impressionists, but he did not follow their lead. Nor,
   despite his interest in the “marvellous” is there anything fey, let
   alone symbolist, about his paintings. Sébillot’s artistic allegiances
   were with the realism of Amédée Guérard and Alexandre Antigna. [24] He
   specialised in landscapes of the Breton coast, and in particular the
   strange scenery of low tide (his first salon piece in 1870 was entitled
   Rocks at Low Tide). This is not a minor genre along Brittany’s côte
   d’emeraude where the sea-level falls several metres daily, revealing
   the rocks that made this coast so dangerous for shipping. [25]

   There is an unexplored connection between the practice of landscape
   painting and folklore collecting in the nineteenth century. Souvestre
   had been a painter before he turned to writing, while artists like
   Jules Bastien-Lepage occasionally dabbled in folklore. [26] In
   Sébillot’s case the meticulousness and commitment to accuracy apparent
   in his paintings would also resurface in his work as a folklorist, for
   although he acknowledged a debt to predecessors like Villemarqué he
   considered himself the leader of a new generation of scientific
   investigators. Sébillot’s conversion from brush to pen was particularly
   fruitful. In 1877 the artist Léonce Petit asked Sébillot if he could
   contribute some stories to a book of fairy-tales that his friend hoped
   to illustrate. Sébillot promised to see what he could unearth the
   following summer while on a painting trip to Brittany. But the weather
   that year was dismal, and while sheltering with peasant families,
   Sébillot asked his hosts if they knew any tales. The more than six
   hundred narratives he collected over the following years were the basis
   for Sébillot’s brilliant career as a folklorist. [27] They provided the
   matter for more than a dozen major publications, starting in 1880 with
   the first volume of Contes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne. [28]

   The title implied that these were characteristically Breton tales.
   Sébillot, like other folklorists, placed his collection within the
   framework of a geographically specific culture (a trend he would help
   propagate as editor of the major collection Les Littératures populaires
   de toutes les nations). But Sébillot was ahead of his time in
   recognising that his informants’ occupations were as significant to the
   kind of stories they told as the places they lived. More than half the
   tales were collected in and around the fishing village of Saint-Cast,
   not far from his hometown of Matignon. Hence the third volume of the
   Contes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne was subtitled Contes des marins.
   Sébillot had come to Saint-Cast in 1879 to paint, but the storytelling
   talent of his landlady Rose Renault set him on a different tack. Her
   house became the centre of Sébillot’s collecting activities as her
   visitors were invited to contribute a tale. Among them was the story in
   the appendix, told in 1880 by an elderly widow named Jeanne le Hérissé.
   It concerns one of those watery rock formations Sébillot painted so
   often _ the Bourdineaux.

   Oral history and folk geography

   The Bourdineaux (or Bourdinots as they now appear on maps) are a group
   of rocks off the tip of the Saint-Cast peninsular, close to the spot
   marked 29 on Sébillot’s map of the legendary geography of the
   area. [29] For fishermen, the virtue of these offshore rocks was that
   they were a haven for marine wild-life, and, in the case of the
   Bourdineaux, for skate in particular. Le Herissé’s story tells of a
   battle for control of the rocks between the Câtins of Saint-Cast and
   the Jaguens of the rival fishing village of Saint-Jacut which faced
   them across the Arguenon estuary. There are numerous stories about
   conflicts between these two villages, several of which focus on this
   same group of rocks. For example, in another tale the Jaguens drop a
   dead donkey in the sea in order to claim all the land it touched, but
   unfortunately for them it by-passed the Bourdineaux. [30]

   The donkey story was probably intended as a joke, but the Jeanne le
   Hérissé told her tale as a matter of history. She had learnt it from
   her grandfather, and according to him the battle had taken place two
   centuries before. It is quite likely that the story has some basis in
   history. Ownership, or use rights, over land was a dominant issue in
   village politics throughout France from the Middle Ages onwards. Most
   communities were, at one time or another, engaged in protracted
   conflicts with their neighbours about their precise boundaries, access
   to water, the use of the woods and pastures between them. These kinds
   of resources were either communal property or at least considered as
   communal property, and so any dispute would involve the community as a
   whole. The court records of both old regime and post-revolutionary
   France abound in such cases, but conflict was not restricted to legal
   argument, it was carried into the fields. [31]. Conscription rallies,
   fairs and even Breton pardons were all occasions for collective
   violence, because at these events rival villagers were bound to meet,
   and therefore argue with one another. In some parts of France, even in
   the nineteenth-century, such riots frequently led to fatalities. [32]
   These village wars tended to have a history. Even if boundaries were
   finally agreed, the vendetta between them left legacies of triumphs to
   be boasted, humiliations to be avenged, events to be memorised and
   retold at communal gatherings. The economic issue might be settled, but
   the conflict was perpetuated through the village’s oral culture, which
   enshrined its code of honour.

   Although the Bourdineaux were at sea, their case was not essentially
   different from any landlocked dispute. They were a collective economic
   resource to which two communities laid claim. Looking at the map it
   would seem as if the Câtins were in the right. There were, as they say
   in story, fishing right in front of their homes. And yet other tales,
   even those told in Saint-Cast, acknowledged some historic relationship
   between the Jaguens and the Bourdineaux. [33] There are two possible
   explanations for this. Firstly, the Jaguens specialised in the fishing
   of skate. This is still apparent in the architecture of the village,
   which is arranged in house-rows with a south-facing façade where the
   skate were hung to dry. The smell was, to judge by the frequent
   comments in the tales, appalling. [34] As the Bourdineaux abounded in
   skate the Jaguens may have felt a proprietorial interest in them.
   Secondly, fishing rights in the estuary of the Arguenon river had been
   the seigneurial property of the Abbey of Saint-Jacut, so fish caught in
   these waters had to be landed at Saint-Jacut. At a pinch the
   Bourdineaux might be included within this seigneurial domain, although
   they were at boundary of the open sea. [35] As a consequence there
   were, in the sixteenth century, numerous stands-off between the fishing
   fleets of the two villages, leading to insults and even injuries. From
   the seventeenth-century onwards the men of both communities found
   employment in deep-sea fishing, in-shore fishing declined and with it
   the economic importance of the Bourdineaux. But the dispute was not
   forgotten, and references to it were sure to enliven encounters between
   the inhabitants of the two peninsulas. Indeed the history was still
   being related in the 1970s, according to Hervé Collet, who audio-taped
   the same tale as told an old sailor of Saint-Jacut. Unfortunately this
   Jaguen version of events probably owes more to a Sébillot reprint than
   to any autochthon tradition, even though there are telling differences
   between the two. [36]

   However, it was not to history that each group appealed during their
   confrontation, but to legend, in particular to divergent legends of
   Gargantua. The story also alludes to several other religious, comic and
   aetiological legends which would help listeners make sense of their
   local geography. Nineteenth-century folklorists were more interested in
   the text than the context, and seldom asked themselves why particular
   stories were being told at particular moments. But in Le Hérissé’s tale
   it is clear that legends were not just amusing pastimes, they had a
   function : it is this functional aspect that provides the link between
   a particular landscape and the stories told within it. Legends were
   mobilized as charters of ownership by the communities that told them.
   According to the Jaguens the Bourdineaux belonged to them because the
   rocks were thrown from their village by the giant Gargantua. The Câtins
   agreed that Gargantua deposited the rocks, but not for the Jaguens,
   rather in disgust at them.

   There is a whole cycle of Gargantua legends concerning this coastline,
   often associated with particular features such as Gargantua’s tooth
   near Saint-Suliac, or his finger at Fort La Latte (both prehistoric
   standing stones). Sébillot collected several Gargantua legends in
   Saint-Cast. [37] They did not concur in every detail, but it is
   nonetheless possible to compile an outline biography for the giant that
   might have been recognised by Câtins. To summarize, Gargantua was born
   at Plévenon. He liked to travel, and visited Dinan, Saint-Malo, Paris
   and Jersey. In each place he terrorised the inhabitants with his
   enormous appetite and marked the landscape in some permanent way. His
   leap from Fort La Latte to Saint-Malo (or, in another version, to
   Jersey), for instance, is commemorated by the indent of the giant’s
   shoe on the cliff-top. Practically all the rocks off the coast were
   ascribed to Gargantua’s actions. According to François Marquer, the
   Câtin cabinboy who was Sébillot’s most forthcoming informant, the
   Becrond (or Bec rond, s it now appears on maps), where the Câtin fleet
   waited to attack the Jaguens, was the result of a Gargantuan bout of
   diarrhoea. The Bourdineaux were created shortly after by the giant’s
   attempts to kill a barnacle goose flying out to sea by throwing stones
   taken from the headland. [38] Presumably the Jaguens were referring to
   a similar story, localised in their own village, during their
   confrontation on the Bourdineaux.

   The Câtins’ response was that Gargantua felt too much disgust for the
   Jaguens to provide for them in this way. The story, as told in
   Saint-Cast, was that Gargantua had been coming home to Plévenon when he
   came across a Jaguen boat loaded with skate caught on the Bourdineaux.
   He gobbled down the boat, crew and catch, but as his journey took him
   past Saint-Jacut, the smell of rotting fish made him throw up his meal.
   The ballast stones from the boat were projected out to sea and formed
   various islands towards Saint-Briac and Saint-Lunaire (in the opposite
   direction to Saint-Cast, and therefore undisputed territory as far as
   Câtins were concerned). [39] In other stories Gargantua did not eat the
   Jaguen boat, simply the smell of its cargo was enough to make him vomit
   up various rocks and islands. In some tales Gargantua then quit the
   country with the words “I don’t want to see the Jaguens any more ; they
   will kill me with their obnoxiousness” ; in others he really was
   overcome with disgust and died. [40]

   Câtins and Jaguens told two contradictory legends about Gargantua and
   the Bourdineaux, but to what extent were either believed ? Belief used
   to be the test that folklorists applied to distinguish a folktale from
   a legend, the former being told as a fiction, and the latter as a true
   account. [41] However, it is difficult to see how anyone could
   countenance that a handful of ballast stones provided the basis for
   several islands. All we can say is that the story (just like Le
   Hérissé’s) was told as if it might be true, and so could be cited as
   fact in disputes between the two villages. But belief was not as
   essential as agreement among the community as to which was the right
   story (or rather, which was the right story for a particular occasion).
   Which story you knew, and told, about Gargantua, the Bourdineaux and
   the Jaguens, would indicate where your loyalties lay. Thus the shared
   story became the basis for communal solidarity.

   Le Hérissé’s tale draws on many other distinctions between the two
   villages. The two fleets even arrive on the scene in different kinds of
   boat : those of the Jaguens are called simply “boats”, but the Câtins
   had “dinghies”. Canot, or dinghy, was the term used for the small,
   stubby, but manoeuvrable boats that fishermen of both villages adopted
   during the nineteenth century. [42] The implication of the story,
   however, is that the Câtins had them first, they were therefore more
   up-to-date and civilised than their neighbours.

   This claim to cultural superiority was confirmed whenever the Jaguens
   opened their mouths. By-and-large Sébillot’s fishermen-storytellers
   spoke good French when telling tales, and were proud of it. Patois was,
   for them, the language of peasants who had never learnt anything of the
   world. [43] Yet, according to Sébillot, whenever one of his
   storytellers adopted the voice of a Jaguen, he or she would put on a
   distinct accent, and lace their speech with characteristic swearing _
   “Dieu me danse” or “Dieu me gagne”, a change Sébillot indicated on the
   written page with italics. He went on to point out, however, that the
   level of education (and therefore presumably correct French usage) was
   higher in Saint-Jacut than in nearby villages. [44] But for the
   storyteller it was not necessary that Jaguens actually spoke like this,
   but that her audience (and the other inhabitants of the region
   generally) understood that this was how Jaguens were supposed to speak.
   Storytellers from all over France used similar tactics to denigrate
   their despised neighbours. [45]

   A further distinction between the villages is offered by the collective
   nicknames, the blason populaire, exchanged between the fishermen. The
   Câtins, apparently because of the colour of their water-proofs, were
   called “petits Jaunes” by the Jaguens, while the latter were termed
   “Houohaous”. According to Sébillot most Câtins thought this was an
   insult, implying that the Jaguens howled like dogs, but it may have
   derived from Saint Houohaou, the name given by the fishermen to a rock
   at the end of the Saint-Jacut peninsular. As they passed the rock
   Jaguens would offer up a prayer “Saint Houohaou, give us
   mackerel”. [46] Every village in France seems to have had at least one
   such collective sobriquet, picking up on some distinguishing aspect of
   dress, economic activity, character or history. [47] However, the
   blason was not used by the villagers themselves, only by their
   neighbours who were also their enemies. They were commonly exchanged
   during disputes over territories. The origins of many nicknames are
   obscure, but where they can be traced they often relate to places or
   events on these disputed frontiers. The rock of Saint Houohaou, for
   example, is at the edge of the commune of Saint-Jacut and the open sea.
   It is, in a sense, a boundary marker. Geography and cultural identity
   are once more brought together.

   The people of Saint-Cast held the Jaguens in low esteem : “Daft as a
   Jaguen” went the local proverb. [48] This reputation was widely known
   on the coast. Sébillot collected stories about Jaguens at Dinard,
   Matignon, and even one from an inhabitant of Saint-Jacut. At Dinan
   stories about idiots, whatever their origin, were termed a
   “Jaguensétés”. [49] An example of such a tale is the “Jaguens’
   Journey”. Because they were so backward and had never left their
   village before, they mistook a field of flax for the sea, and a
   partridge for a feathered fish. [50] On another occasion they thought a
   lobster was the devil. [51] Similar, if less maritime, stories were
   told about dozens of other villages in France and further afield, such
   as the famous “Wise Men of Gotham” in Nottinghamshire, just one of at
   least forty-five places in England described as the “village of
   fools”. [52] “Numskull-tales”, as these kind of tales are listed in the
   international type index, prove once more that folklore knows no
   boundaries. One can find nearly identical stories in the literature of
   ancient India, Turkey and China. [53] But while they were known all
   over the world, they were not told as universally valid, but rather
   only as true for particular villages. It was not the folklorist who
   located them in the landscape, it was the narrators.

   We get a hint of the Jaguens’ reputation near the beginning of this
   story, when they demand that no guns be used, as no one in Saint-Jacut
   knew how to fire one. But the full depth of their stupidity is saved
   until the end, when, disgusted at Jesus for not helping them, even
   though they had taken the trouble to bring him along on his cross, they
   drag the crucifix through the streets and finally burn it. Despite (or
   more probably because of) the presence of an abbey in the village,
   several Jaguen tales turn on their misunderstanding of, or contempt
   for, both the symbols of the Church and its personnel. Hence the
   proverbial phrase, “It’s like the old Jaguens, who no more believed in
   God than in his saints”. [54] Câtins could also be anticlerical, even
   sceptical on occasions, and yet still look down on their neighbours,
   not so much for their lack of belief but because they did not know how
   to behave. Given Sébillot’s politics he probably rather enjoyed these
   stories, although he got into a bit of trouble with local Catholics
   when he published the story of the “Le Bon Dieu de Saint-Jacut” in a
   local newspaper. [55] In this story the Jaguens realise they are the
   only village without such an asset, which may account for a series of
   poor barley harvests. But even when they have erected their own
   crucifix, the harvest are no better, so they beat and even shoot the
   figure of Jesus. (This may be a deliberately ironic counter-comment to
   the common legend of Breton piety in which a peasant refuses to strike
   a crucifix despite threats from Republican troops, and dies a martyr’s
   death.) [56] The Jaguens finally decide to kill their God, but unsure
   how this might be done safely, they carry him over to the Isle Agot in
   the bay and leave him there. [57] Le Hérissé’s tale picks up on both
   the Jaguens’ anticlerical reputation and their mistreatment of the
   crucifix. It is also has aetiological aspects because the crucifix has
   since disappeared from the Isle Agot, yet one can still see the base
   where it stood.

   What Freud called the “narcissism of minor differences” mattered a lot
   in these small, face-to-face communities. The untutored eye might have
   found little to separate the villages of Saint-Cast and Saint-Jacut at
   the end of the nineteenth-century, but Câtins would have been insulted
   by any such comparison. It would have sullied their reputation, and
   reputation was vital to their well-being. The advancement of credit,
   getting the best berths on ship, the chances to make a good marriage,
   all depended on the good name of one’s family and community. Yet
   reputation is a strange thing in that one can only increase one’s own
   by diminishing one’s rivals. Telling numskull stories emphasises the
   superior reputation of one’s own community by denigrating another’s,
   and this helps reunite one’s village in a sense of its own worth.
   Otherwise it was in danger of being torn apart by its own internal
   honour disputes between families and colleagues.

   A fishing community like Saint-Cast may have had particular need of the
   balm of storytelling (which perhaps accounts for why Sébillot found it
   such a fertile source). Fishermen liked to create for themselves a
   persona of aggressive individualism, so unlike the servile peasants
   they despised. In folktales this persona took shape as the hero
   “Tribord Amures”, the sailor who gave way to no man. [58] Such
   attitudes helped the men to cope with the grinding misery of their work
   on the Newfoundland banks, and the ruthless competition fostered
   between them by the trawler captains. Much of Sébillot’s collection was
   told by boys _ apprentice fishermen _ whose tales evinced
   characteristics of devil-may-care heroism and a refusal ever to bow
   one’s head. Thus they demonstrated they had acquired the fishermen’s
   morality and were ready to enter the world of men. But fishermen also
   needed the community : their work was dangerous and their relied on
   warnings and help given by their colleagues ; if they died at sea they
   needed to know that their loved ones would be cared for ; and if they
   were denied access to their fishing grounds they needed the community
   to come to their support, as in the case of the Bourdineaux.
   Storytelling was one mechanism through which that community reconnected
   with itself.

   This one story of the “Battle of the Bourdineaux” has led us on quite a
   tour of the region around Saint-Cast, from Plévenon to the Isle Agot.
   For a storyteller like Jeanne Le Hérissé the landscape oozed
   narratives. Stories endowed space with meanings. Guided by her tale, Le
   Hérissé’s audience could orientate themselves in the landscape :
   aetiological legends like that of Gargantua’s finger, and lieux-dits
   such as the Becrond, contained descriptions of landmarks which together
   formed a working map of the area. Legends were an informal education in
   significant geography : one learnt the boundaries of one’s community
   with one’s neighbours and, just as importantly, with the supernatural.
   Legends connected the vital history of the community to its
   environment. No Câtin fisherman could forget that his ancestors had
   fought and won their claim to the Bourdineaux, for the rocks themselves
   were a daily, visual mnemonic. During Rogationtide ceremonies in
   England, boys accompanying the procession around the perimeter of the
   parish would be beaten at each boundary marker, to help them more
   vividly their exact location. [59] Legends served a similar, if less
   painful function. They were the collective memory of the community.

   Storytelling also gave Jeanne Le Hérissé a continuing role in the
   village. The Le Hérissé family had lived in Saint-Cast since at least
   the fifteenth century, and although they had lost their letters of
   nobility in 1670, Jeanne’s great-grandfather still styled himself
   “noble écuyer” when he built the manor of Sainte Blanche in 1775. But
   since the revolution the family’s social status and fortune had
   declined markedly. Jeanne’s grandfather had been a substantial
   landowner, but Jeanne had married a simple fisherman, Marc Renault.
   Like so many of his compatriots he had died at sea leaving her with at
   least five children to bring up. [60] A widow in her late fifties with
   three daughters still living at home, Jeanne was in danger of becoming
   a marginal figure even in a matriarchal community like Saint-Cast. Yet
   she retained some cultural capital : she knew things that might be
   important to future generations of Câtins, like why the Bourdineaux
   belonged to them. In her story both Câtins and Jaguens turn to their
   oldest inhabitants in this crisis because, as Jeanne puts it, “among
   the old there is always one cleverer than the others”. She was, in an
   oblique fashion, talking about herself. [61] The lessons she gave in
   folk geography staked her claim to full membership in the community.

Appendix

‘La Bataille des Bourdineaux’

   From Paul Sébillot, Contes Populaires de la Haute-Bretagne III : Contes
   des Marins , (Paris, 1883).

   Au temps jadis, les Jaguens s’étaient mis dans l’idée que le rocher des
   Bourdineaux leur appartenait et qu’eux seuls avaient le droit d’y
   pêcher.
   Un jour, trois bateaux jaguens arrivèrent près des Bourdineaux, et deux
   canots de Saint-Cast qui vinrent ensuite mouillèrent trop près des
   Jaguens, presque dans leur affare.
   _ Dieu me danse, mon fu, s’écrièrent les Jaguens, rehale vitement ton
   aussière ; tu viens mouiller dans nos lignes, et païcher su’ not’
   terrain.
   _Est-ce que vous voudriez nous engarder de pêcher devant sez nous ?
   répondirent les Câtins.
   _Le rochier est à ma, riposta le patron des Jaguens, entends-tu, petit
   Jaune ?
   _Non fait, Ouohau, i n’est pas à ta.
   _Si fait, c’est un rocher que Gargantua nous a volé ; il l’a prins sez
   nous et l’a jeté ici en passant.
   _N’est pas pour ta que Gargantua l’a jeté ici, répondirent les Câtins,
   ‘était pour nous ; il avait trop dangier des Jaguens pour voulaï le
   lous donner.
   Voilà la bataille qui commence ; les Jaguens jetèrent des cailloux aux
   Câtins qui ripostèrent, et finirent par sauter à l’abordage des bateaux
   ennemis : il y eut deux Jaguens qui furent très maltraités ce jour-là,
   et leur patron dit aux Câtins :
   _Dieu me danse, mon fu, fau’ra mettre la partie a demain ; j’amenerons
   do nous tous les chefs des bas, et v’amenerez les vôtres ; les p’us
   forts aront les Bourdiniaux. Mais n’ fau’ra point s’ batt’e à coups de
   fusi’, mon petit fu, n’y en a pas iun dans Saint-Jégu qui saige tirer ;
   je nous battrons do des sabres et do des baïonnettes, do des pierres et
   do des bâtons.
   _C’est bien, répondirent les Câtins, demain j’amènerons nos patrons et
   vous les vôtres.
   Voilà les Câtins et les Jaguens partis chacun de son côté pour se
   préparer à la bataille du lendemain.
   Quand les gens de Saint-Cast furent de retour, ils racontèrent aux
   autres pêcheurs la dispute et le rendez-vous pour le lendemain. Les
   anciens s’assemblèrent, et comme parmi les vieux, il y en a toujours
   qui sont plus rusés que les autres, l’un des anciens dit :
   _Il faudra laisser les Jaguens mouiller les premiers, puis vous vous
   mettrez du bord du vent pour leur envoyer de la poussière dans les
   yeux. Dites aux femmes et aux enfants de prendre des sacs et de les
   remplir avec la poussière des routes et la cendre des foyers ; ce
   seront les munitions dont vous chargerez vos bateaux.
   Aussitôt les femmes et les enfants se mirent à balayer les routes et à
   ramasser la poussière dans les sacs et les vieilles femmes y mettaient
   la cendre de leur foyer.
   Le lendemain dès le matin, on vit sortir tous les bateaux de
   Saint-Jacut. Les Jaguens avaient chargé leurs embarcations avec des
   cailloux, et ils s’étaient armés de sabres, de baïonnettes et de
   bâtons. Ils amenaient avec eux, pour juger la bataille, le plus ancien
   homme de la paroisse, le bonhomme Mateur, qui avait cent treize ans.
   Quand ils furent à moitié route, ils se dirent :
   _Mon petit fu, quand j’arons battu les petits Jaunes, fau’ra qu’i’s
   lèvent la main et promègent de ne jamais retourner ès Bourdiniaux.
   _Vère, mais devant qui qu’i’s lèveront la main ?
   _Faut aller queri’un bon Dieu.
   Deux bateaux virèrent de bord et allèrent à Saint-Jacut : ils
   déplantèrent une grande croix et la mirent sur un des ‘carrés’ pour
   faire jurer les petits Jaunes.
   Les Câtins étaient mouillés à Becrond, et ils attendaient pour lever
   l’ancre que la flotte des Jaguens fût arrivée aux Bourdineaux. Alors
   ils mirent à la voile, et passèrent au vent des Jaguens. Ils voyaient
   un des carrés qui avait un calvaire attaché à son mât, et le bonhomme
   Mateur qui se tenait au pied.
   _Vaïci l’bon Dieu, dirent les Jaguens, v’allez jurer devant li et
   l’bonhomme Mateur qu’a cent treize ans, de ne p’us retourner ès
   Bourdiniaux, ou bien le combat va commencer.
   _Quand vous voudrez, répondirent les Câtins.
   Et ils se mirent à affarer et à tendre leurs lignes.
   _Le rochier-là est à nous, dirent les Jaguens, faut lever l’ancre,
   j’allons compter di qu’à tras, et si vêtes cor mouillés, j’allons nous
   battre : au p’us fort la pouche.
   Voilà les Jaguens qui commencent à jeter des cailloux sur leurs
   ennemis ; mais les Câtins, qui étaient au vent, délièrent leurs sacs,
   et la brise qui était fraîche envoyait la poussière et la cendre sur
   les Jaguens qui en recevaient sur les yeux, sur le nez, dans la bouche,
   dans les oreilles, et ne savaient où se fourrer. On les entendait
   éternuer comme s’ils avaient eu du tabac plein le nez. Les Câtins, en
   continuant à lancer de la poussière, sautèrent à l’abordage, et furent
   bientôt vainqueurs ; ce jour-là il y eut deux Jaguens qui furent
   blessés, et un Câtin perdit l’oeil d’un coup de pierre. Alors les
   Jaguens abattirent le calvaire, et le bonhomme Mateur leur dit :
   _Par ma fa, mon fu, faut abandonner les Bourdiniaux, les petits Jaunes
   sont les p’us forts.
   Les Jaguens levèrent l’ancre ; comme ils s’en allaient on les entendait
   qui se disputaient entre eux, et ils faisaient des reproches au bon
   Dieu.
   _Je l’avions amené do nous, disaient-ils, pour nous servi’ d’avocat, i’
   n’a ren dit : ‘est le bon Dieu sans pitié, i’ n’a pas tant sieurement
   fait tourner le vent.
   Et en débarquant à Saint-Jacut, ils attachèrent une corde à la croix,
   la traînèrent par les chemins et allèrent ensuite la brûler.

   This article first appeared in Soil and Stone: Impresssionism,
   Urbanism, Environment, Frances Fowle and Richard Thomson (eds).
   Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003. It is available on this site by permission of
   the author, editors and publisher.

   [1] “Mais cependant, monsieur Briffaut [sic], la couleur locale  !”
   M. Briffaut sourit, de ce charmant sourire moitié protecteur moitié
   dédaigneux, et qui n’appartient qu’à des lèvres académiques :
   “Monsieur, dit-il, de notre temps, à nous autres, la couleur locale
   n’était pas encore inventéé.” This story is told, to make much the same
   point, in Patrice Boussel, Veillées du pays normand, Paris, 1970, p.7.
   Dumas recalled his conversations with Brifaut at some length in his
   memoirs, but according to his recollection what shocked him was
   Brifaut’s casual attitude to historical accuracy, rather than local
   colour.

   [2] Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger (eds.), The Invention of
   Tradition, Cambridge, 1983  ; Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities :
   Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism, London, 1983.
   These two works have been very influential on historical scholarship.
   Both concepts, at least in common usage among historians, concern the
   mobilisation of collective identities supposedly based on historical
   continuities, but which have in fact been constructed by elites (or
   would-be elites) to meet the needs of current political ideologies.

   [3] Anthropology, in particular, has been forced onto the defensive.
   While preparing this paper I chanced on this pithy challenge : “almost
   every generation of anthropologists has condemned previous researchers
   for faulty studies, imperialistic or colonialist arrogance, or plain
   doctoring of the material. The idea of the participant observer has
   little credibility in academic circles, and the standing of much
   ethnographic research is these days roughly on a par with reality TV.”
   Jenny Diski, review of David Gilmour Misogyny : The Male Malady in
   London Review of Books, 6 September, 2001. I do not associate myself
   with these remarks, I quote them merely to demonstrate that such
   attitudes have become part of the academic mainstream.

   [4] Regina Bendix, In Search of Authenticity : The Formation of
   Folklore Studies, Madison WI, 1997, pp.45-67.

   [5] Peter Burke, Popular Culture in Early Modern Europe, Aldershot,
   1978, pp.3-22.

   [6] Herder quoted in William A.Wilson, “Herder, Folklore and Romantic
   Nationalism”, Journal of Popular Culture, 6, 1972-3, pp.821-2.

   [7] John M. Ellis, One Fairy Story too Many : The Brothers Grimm and
   their Tales, Chicago, 1983, p.25  ; Hermann Rebel, “Why not ‘Old
   Marie’… or someone very much like her  ? A Reassessment of the question
   about the Grimms’ contributors from a social historical perspective’,
   Social History, 13, 1988, p.1.

   [8] “nous nous sommes borné à publier… ceux desquels s’exhalait cette
   senteur du pays qui ne peut tromper.” Emile Souvestre, Le Foyer
   breton : Contes et récits populaires, Paris, n.d. (first edition 1844),
   p.18.

   [9] Paul Delarue, The Borzoi Book of French Folktales, New York, 1956,
   p.xvi.

   [10] “Ils devaient être plus intelligents que bien d’autres,les gars
   qui ont inventé ça. C’était pas du monde de Mayun : c’est pas ici que
   vous trouverez ça. Ils venaient peut-être du fond de l’Angleterre, de
   je sais pas où…” : Arien de Félice, Contes de Haute-Bretagne, Paris,
   1954, p.xiv.

   [11] Stith Thompson, The Folktale, New York, 1946, pp.126-9.

   [12] Paul Delarue, Le Conte populaire français : catalogue raisonné,
   Paris, 1957, vol.1 p.44.

   [13] The case against Villemarqué is made by Francis Gourvil,
   Théodore-Claude-Henri Hersart de la Villemarqué (1815-1895) et le
   “Barzaz-Breiz” (1839-1845-1867), Rennes, 1960. For a less harsh
   judgement see Mary-Ann Constantine, Breton Ballads, Aberystwyth, 1996,
   10-16.

   [14] Malcolm Chapman, The Celts : The Construction of a Myth,
   Basingstoke, 1992, pp. 123-4, 138, 208. Donatien Laurent, who
   discovered and published the field notebooks in which Villemarqué
   recorded the ballads he heard, is justly annoyed that a quarter of
   century later even specialists in the field should still be repeating
   this calumny : “La Villemarqué et les premiers collecteurs en
   Bretagne”, in Fanch Postic (ed.), La Bretagne et la littérature orale
   en Europe, Brest, 1999, p.165.

   [15] David Hopkin, ‘Identity in a Divided Province : The Folklorists of
   Lorraine, 1860-1960’, French Historical Studies 23 (2000), 639-82.

   [16] Peter Burke, Popular Culture in Early Modern Europe, Aldershot,
   1978, pp.270-86.

   [17] “‘The peasant’ as a type, whether stigmatized or idealized, was a
   creation of non-peasants” : Robert Tombs, France, 1814-1914, London,
   1996, p. 289. Tombs uses Anderson’s phrase “imagined community” to
   describe the peasantry.

   [18] Eugen Weber, Peasants into Frenchmen : The Modernization of Rural
   France, 1870-1914, Stanford, 1976. For a view of the peasant influenced
   by post-modernism see James R. Lehning, Peasant and French : Cultural
   Contact in Rural France during the Nineteenth Century, Cambridge, 1995,
   pp.11-34.

   [19] Françoise Morvan, François-Marie Luzel, Rennes, 1999, pp.80, 114,
   221-30.

   [20] For details of Sébillot’s family background see : Léon Séché,
   Figures bretonnes et angevinnes : Paul Sébillot (notice biographique et
   bibliographique), Vannes, 1890.

   [21] Paul Sébillot, “Notes pour servir à l’histoire du folk-lore en
   France”, Revue des traditions populaires 28 (1913), p.56.

   [22] Henri Gaidoz, “Eugène Rolland et son oeuvre littéraire”, Mélusine
   11 (1912), 417-40. The sarcastic comments Gaidoz made about Sébillot in
   this obituary for their mutual friend led to an extremely bitter row
   between the two men which overshadowed French folklore studies at the
   beginning of the twentieth century. See Richard Dorson’s foreword to
   Geneviève Massignon (ed.) Folktales of France, London, 1968, xiv-xxvii.

   [23] “l’idée me vint de rechercher, lors des prochaines vacances, s’il
   y avait dans mon pays natal des histoires merveilleuses ou fantastiques
   dignes de figurer dans un Foyer gallo.” Sébillot, “Notes pour servir…”,
   pp.51-2.

   [24] Denise Delouche, Peintres de la Bretagne : Découverte d’une
   province, Paris, 1977, pp.337-8.

   [25] Some of Sébillot’s paintings can be seen on an excellent website
   produced by the pupils of the Collège Paul Sébillot in Matignon. See :
   http://www.bretagne-racines.ac-rennes.fr/

   [26] Adrien Oudin, ‘La Basse-Bretagne conteuse et légendaire’, Revue
   britannique, (1891), reprinted in Contes et légendes de Basse-Bretagne,
   Spézet, 1995, p.159. On their walking holidays in the Meuse Jules
   Bastien-Lepage and his friend the poet André Theuriet collected
   folklore which Theuriet contributed to Henri Labourasse, Anciens us,
   coutumes, légendes, superstitions, préjugés, etc. du département de la
   Meuse, Bar-le-Duc 1903. Bastien-Lepage’s unfinished painting
   L’Enterrement d’un jeune fille is a pictorial representation of an
   event described by Labourasse. Two other important folklorists, Victor
   Smith and Achillle Millien, were significant patrons of landscape
   artists.

   [27] Sébillot, “Notes pour servir…” p.57.

   [28] These include : Contes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne : Contes
   merveilleux, Paris, 1880  ; La Littérature orale de la Haute-Bretagne,
   Paris, 1881  ; Contes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne : Contes des
   paysans et des pêcheurs, Paris, 1881  ; Contes populaires de la
   Haute-Bretagne : Contes des marins, Paris, 1882  ; Les Traditions et
   superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne, Paris, 1882, 2 vols.  ; Gargantua
   dans les traditions populaires, Paris, 1883  ; Contes de terre et de
   mer, Paris, 1883 (a selection from the previous volumes illustrated by
   Léonce Petit, among others)  ; Coutumes populaires de la
   Haute-Bretagne, Paris, 1886  ; Légendes chrétiennes de la
   Haute-Bretagne, Nantes, 1886-92, 2 vols.  ; Petite légende dorée de la
   Haute-Bretagne, Nantes, 1897  ; Légendes locales de la Haute-Bretagne,
   Nantes, 1899-1900, 2 vols.  ; Contes des landes et des grèves, Paris,
   1900  ; Les joyeuses histoires de Bretagne, Paris, 1910. Sébillot was
   also author of numerous more general works on the folklore of the sea,
   of fishermen and various other occupations such as bakers, as well as
   studies of paganism, of mines and public works (a product of his
   connection to Guyot, who was Minister of Public Works), culminating in
   a four volume encyclopaedia of the Folklore de France, Paris, 1904-7.
   Most of these works have been republished, and the Presses
   universitaires de Rennes is currently engaged in bringing out an edited
   version of Sébillot’s collection.

   [29] “Carte de la géographie légendaire du canton de Matignon” in Paul
   Sébillot, “Petites légendes locales CCCCXXXIII : Géographie légendaire
   d’un canton”, Revue des traditions populaires, 16, 1901, p.4.

   [30] “L’âne des Jaguens”, told by Françoise Guinel of Saint-Cast : Paul
   Sébillot, Contes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne III : Contes des
   marins, Rennes, 2000, pp.281-2. The Jaguens’ donkey turns up in other
   tales.

   [31] Inter-village rivalries, and the violence that accompanied them,
   have been studied by several historians. See, among others : Robert
   Muchembled, La Violence au village (XV^e-XVII^e siècle), Turnhout,
   1989, pp.86-105  ; Peter Sahlins, “The Nation in the Village : State
   Building and Communal Struggles in the Catalan Borderland during the
   18th and 19th Centuries”, Journal of Modern History 60, 1988, 234-63  ;
   Stephen Wilson, Feuding, Conflict and Banditry in Nineteenth-Century
   Corsica, Cambridge, 1988, pp.158-76.

   [32] François Ploux, “Rixes intervillageoises en Quercy (1815-1850)”,
   Ethnologie française 21, 1991, 269-75.

   [33] For example, “Le Minard du Jaguen” told by Françoise Guinel of
   Saint-Cast in 1882 : Paul Sébillot, Contes des landes et grèves,
   Rennes, 1997, pp.207-12  ; and “Gargantua et les Jaguens”, told by
   François Marquer, cabin-boy of Saint-Cast, in 1882 : Paul Sébillot,
   Gargantua dans les traditions populaires, Paris, 1883, p.71. Guinel, a
   forty-three year old fisherman’s wife, specialised in Jaguen stories,
   or “couyonades” as they were known in Saint-Cast. Nine out of the ten
   stories she told Sébillot concerned their antics.

   [34] Paul Sébillot, Contes comiques des Bretons, [reprint of the
   Joyeuses histoires de Bretagne] Paris, 1983, p.16.

   [35] J.-C. Menes, “Les Pêcheries et l’abbaye”, Les Amis du vieux
   Saint-Jacut, sauvegarde du patrimoine archéologique et historique du
   pays jaguen, 27, 1995, pp, 24-30.

   [36] Hervé Collet, ‘La bataille des Bourdineaux’, Les Amis du vieux
   Saint Jacut 1 (1982), pp. 16-26.

   [37] Sébillot, Gargantua, pp.19-91. This collection also includes the
   tale of “Le dent de Gargantua”, collected by Elvire de Cerny, at
   Saint-Suliac.

   [38] “Gargantua filleul des fées”, told by François Marqauer :
   Sébillot, Gargantua, pp. 40-1.

   [39] “Gargantua et les Jaguens” : Sébillot, Gargantua, p.72.

   [40] “Je ne veux plus voir les Jaguens  ; ils me feraient mourir de
   donger” : Sébillot, Gargantua, pp.32, 72.

   [41] Linda Dégh and Andrew Vázsonyi, “Legend and Belief”, in Dan
   Ben-Amos, Folklore Genres, Austin TX, 1976, pp.93-123.

   [42] Pierre Amiot, Histoire de Saint-Cast-Le Guildo, Carrien, 1990,
   p.560.

   [43] Folktale narrators in most parts of France often preferred to tell
   their tales in French (or what they understood to be French), even if
   their daily language of communication was patois. The use of French
   emphasised the artistic nature of the act of storytelling. See, for
   example, Ariane de Félice, Contes de Haute-Bretagne, Paris, 1954,
   p.xii.

   [44] Sébillot, Contes comiques, p.17. Not only Saint-Jacut but all
   their surrounding villages had distinctive ways of speaking, according
   to Sébillot’s Câtin informants : Blason Populaire de la Haute-Bretagne,
   Paris, 1888, (extract from Revue de Linguistique), p.12.

   [45] Charles and Alice Joisten, Contes populaires de Savoie, Grenoble,
   1999, pp.139-91.

   [46] “Saint Houohaou, Donnez-nous du maquériau” : Sébillot, Contes
   comiques, 48-9.

   [47] In the days before their falling out Sébillot and Henri Gaidoz had
   worked together on a guide to Le Blason populaire de la France, Paris,
   1884. For a more recent study see Jean Vartier, Le Blason populaire de
   France, Paris, 1992.

   [48] “Bête comme un Jaguen” : Sébillot, Contes comiques, p.56.

   [49] Sébillot, Contes comiques, p.16.

   [50] This was a particularly popular story, told to Sébillot by at
   least five people Contes comiques, pp.18, 27, 50, 56.

   [51] Sébillot, Contes comiques, p.60.

   [52] Including Austwick, Bolliton, Borrowdale, Coggeshall, Darlaston,
   Folkstone, Pevensey, and Yabberton.

   [53] Thompson, The Folktale, pp.190-6. Not all folktale fools come from
   “villages of idiots”, but any numskull tale can be readily adapted to
   fit the needs of village rivalries.

   [54] “C’est comme les vieux Jaguens, Qui n’croient pas p’us dans l’bon
   Dieu qu’dans les saints” : Sébillot, Contes comiques, p.41.

   [55] Sébillot, Contes comiques, p.11.

   [56] Musée départemental breton, L’Imagerie populaire bretonne,
   Quimper, 1992, p.159.

   [57] “Le Bon Dieu de Saint-Jacut”, told by Françoise Guinel of
   Saint-Cast : Paul Sébillot, Contes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne
   III : Contes des marins, Rennes, 2000, pp.259-63.

   [58] “Tribord Amures”, told by Auguste Macé in 1880, eighteen-year-old
   sailor of Saint-Cast : Sébillot, Contes des marins, pp.62-66  ;
   “Tribord Amures”, told by François Marquer in 1880 : Paul Sébillot
   ‘Contes de marins recueillis en Haute-Bretagne’, Archivio per le studio
   delle tradizioni popolari, 10, 1891, pp.109-11. “Tribord Amures” is an
   nautical term meaning that a ship is on starboard tack. All other
   vessels are supposed to give way, hence the phrase “Tribord Amures, roi
   des mers”.

   [59] Adam Fox, Oral and Literate Culture in England 1500-1700, Oxford,
   2000. pp.268-71.

   [60] Genealogical details are taken from François Le Hérissé, Histoire
   généalogique de la famille Le Hérissé de la Mare (Hénon
   [Côtes-du-Nord]), Saint-Cast, 1988. In the Etat Civil and other
   documents, such as the Inscription maritime, Marc Renault’s wife’s name
   is given as Françoise Hérissé rather than Jeanne. However, as the only
   Le Hérissé married to Renault living in Saint-Cast there can be no
   doubt as to her identity.

   [61] Jacqueline Simpson, “Beyond Etiology : Interpreting Local
   Legends”, Fabula 24, 1983, pp. 227-8.

     * > Ethnographes et anthropologues
     * > Institutions et revues anthropologiques
     * > Concepts, objets et traditions anthropologiques

     * « Paul Sébillot, vie et œuvre d’un ‘prince du folklore’ »
       , Claudie Voisenat, 2008
     * “Legendary Places: Oral History and Folk Geography in
       Nineteenth-Century Brittany”
       , David Hopkin, 2010
     * « Paul Sébillot à la revue L’Homme »
       , Claudie Voisenat, 2010
     * « Paul Sébillot à la Société d’anthropologie de Paris »
       , Claudie Voisenat, 2010
     * « Paul Sébillot et l’invention du folklore matérialiste »
       , Claudie Voisenat, 2010
     * « Paul Sébillot et les légendes locales : des sources pour une
       histoire ‘démocratique’ ? »
       , David Hopkin, 2010

   Sources primaires
     * « Ce que m’a dit La Villemarqué »
       , Paul Sébillot, 1912
     * Contes des marins de la Haute-Bretagne, Harrap’s
       , Paul Sébillot, 1913
     * Le folk-lore de France
       , Paul Sébillot, 1904-1907
     * « Mémoires d’un Breton de Paris »
       , Paul Sébillot, 1913-1914

   Notes et instruments de recherche
     * Bibliographie de Paul Sébillot
       , 2008
     * Bibliographie sur Paul Sébillot
       , 2008
     * Notes sur le dossier de demande d’adhésion de P. Sébillot à la
       Société des gens de lettres
     * Notes sur les Annuaires de la Pomme (1887 et 1906)

   Rencontres
     * De la Bretagne à Paris. Paul Sébillot (1843-1918). Un républicain
       promoteur des traditions populaires
       , 2008

   Dossiers documentaires associés
     * Annuaire des traditions populaires (1886-1894)
     * Revue des traditions populaires (1886-1919)
     * Dîners celtiques (1879-1902)
     * Dîners de Ma Mère l’Oye (1882-1914)
     * Gaidoz, Henri (1842-1832) et Sébillot, Paul 1843-1918)
     * Gaidoz, Henri (1842-1932)
     * Machado y Álvarez, Antonio (1846-1893)
     * Pitrè, Giuseppe (1841/48-1916)
     * Rolland, Eugène (1846-1909)
     * Van Gennep, Arnold (1873-1957)
