   #alternate

   BBC Homepage
     * Skip to content
     * Accessibility Help

     * Your account

     * Home
     * News
     * Sport
     * Business
     * Innovation
     * Culture
     * Travel
     * Earth
     * Video
     * Live
     * More menu

   More menu
   Search BBC
     * Home
     * News
     * Sport
     * Business
     * Innovation
     * Culture
     * Travel
     * Earth
     * Video
     * Live

   Close menu
   BBC News

   Menu
     * Home
     * Israel-Gaza war
     * War in Ukraine
     * Climate
     * Video
     * World
     * UK
     * Business
     * Tech
     * Science

   More
     * Entertainment & Arts
     * Health
     * World News TV
     * In Pictures
     * BBC Verify
     * Newsbeat

Five media myths of Watergate

     * Published
       17 June 2012

   (BUTTON) Share
   (BUTTON) close panel
   Share page
   (BUTTON) Copy link
   About sharing
   Bob Woodward, right, and Carl Bernstein in the Washington Post
   newsroom, 7 May 1973
   Image caption,

   Woodward (right) and Bernstein (left) became the embodiment of the
   media myth about Watergate
   By Prof W Joseph Campbell
   American University, Washington DC

   The run-up to the 40th anniversary of the Watergate break-in — the
   burglary that gave rise to America's gravest political crisis — has
   inevitably been accompanied by the mythology that has shaped and
   distorted popular understanding of the epic scandal.

   The mythology is both delicious and durable, and revolves around the
   Washington Post and its Watergate reporters, Bob Woodward and Carl
   Bernstein. They are legends in American journalism, not only because of
   their award-winning reporting but because of the screen adaptation of
   their book about Watergate, All the President's Men.

   The movie came out in 1976 and starred Robert Redford as Woodward, and
   Dustin Hoffman as Bernstein. The New York Times called it "a
   spellbinding detective story". And the Post once described All the
   President's Men as "the best film ever made about the craft of
   journalism".

   It is undoubtedly the most-viewed of the handful of films and
   documentaries about Watergate, the scandal that toppled President
   Richard Nixon and sent to jail 20 men associated with his
   administration or his 1972 re-election campaign.

   All the President's Men was more than merely entertaining. It was a
   vehicle for propelling and solidifying prominent media myths of
   Watergate, five of which are discussed here:

   <bold>The Washington Post brought down Nixon's corrupt
   presidency</bold>: This long ago became the dominant narrative of the
   Watergate scandal. It holds that Woodward and Bernstein, through their
   dogged reporting, revealed the crimes that forced Nixon to resign the
   presidency in August 1974.

   That's also the inescapable, if tacit conclusion of the movie, which
   places Woodward and Bernstein at the centre of Watergate's unravelling
   while minimising or ignoring the far more decisive contributions of
   subpoena-wielding investigators.

   Rolling up a scandal of Watergate's dimension and complexity required
   the collective efforts of special prosecutors, federal judges, both
   houses of Congress, the Supreme Court, as well as the Justice
   Department and the FBI.

   Even then, Nixon likely would have survived the scandal if not for the
   audiotape recordings he secretly made of conversations in the Oval
   Office of the White House. Only when compelled by the Supreme Court did
   Nixon surrender the recordings, which captured him approving a plan to
   divert the FBI's investigation of the break-in.

   Interestingly, principals at the Washington Post have periodically
   scoffed at the dominant narrative of Watergate. Woodward, for example,
   once said "the mythologising of our role in Watergate has gone to the
   point of absurdity, where journalists write… that I, single-handedly,
   brought down Richard Nixon. Totally absurd".

   <bold>The Post, at least, "uncovered" the Watergate story</bold>: Not
   quite. Watergate began as a police beat story. News of the scandal's
   seminal crime — the thwarted break-in of 17 June 1972, at the
   headquarters of the Democratic National Committee at the Watergate
   complex in Washington DC — began circulating within hours.

   The opening paragraph of the Post's front-page report about the
   burglary made clear that the details had come from investigators. It
   read: "Five men, one of whom said he is a former employee of the
   Central Intelligence Agency, were arrested at 2:30 a.m. yesterday in
   what authorities described as an elaborate plot to bug the offices of
   the Democratic National Committee here."

   Nor did the Post uncover crucial elements of the deepening scandal,
   such as Nixon's secret taping system. Existence of the White House
   tapes was disclosed in 1973 to an investigating committee of the US
   Senate.

   And as Edward Jay Epstein pointed out in a brilliant essay in 1974, the
   Watergate reporting of Woodward and Bernstein was often derivative and
   sustained by leaks from federal investigations into the scandal.

   <bold>The stealthy Watergate source Deep Throat famously advised
   Woodward to "follow the money</bold>": That pithy and often-quoted line
   supposedly was the key to unlocking the complexities of Watergate. In
   fact, it was born of dramatic licence.
   W Mark Felt speaks to reporters in 2005
   Image caption,

   In 2005, W Mark Felt, a justice department official, confessed that he
   was Deep Throat

   "Follow the money" was spoken not by the real-life Deep Throat source
   but by Hal Holbrook, the actor who played Deep Throat in All the
   President's Men.

   In real-life, the Deep Throat source conferred periodically with
   Woodward (sometimes in an underground car park) as the scandal
   unfolded. But he did not advise Woodward to "follow the money".

   Woodward and Bernstein were already on the money trail: One of their
   most important stories was to describe how funds donated to Nixon's
   re-election campaign had been used for the Watergate break-in. But
   unravelling the scandal was far more demanding than following the
   money. Nixon resigned not because he misused funds donated to his 1972
   campaign but because he clearly obstructed justice.

   Deep Throat, by the way, revealed himself in 2005 to have been W Mark
   Felt, formerly the FBI's second-ranking official. He was no hero,
   though.

   Felt was convicted in 1980 on felony charges related to break-ins he
   had approved in the FBI's investigations into the radical Weather
   Underground organisation. But Felt never went to jail. He was pardoned
   in 1981 by President Ronald Reagan.

   <bold>Their Watergate reporting placed Woodward and Bernstein in grave
   danger</bold>: Hardly, although All the President's Men says as much.
   In a scene near the close of the movie, Deep Throat tells Woodward that
   the reporters' "lives are in danger".

   The warning, which injected drama into the movie's sometimes-leaden
   pacing, also was mentioned in All the President's Men, the book.
   However, it was fairly quickly determined to have been a false alarm.

   This video can not be played

To play this video you need to enable JavaScript in your browser.

   Media caption,

   Robert Redford: 'I came in when journalism had reached an apex of
   morality and professionalism'

   Woodward, Bernstein and senior editors at the Post took precautions for
   a while to avoid the suspected electronic surveillance of their
   activities. But as Woodward recounted in The Secret Man, his 2005 book
   about Deep Throat, such measures "soon seemed melodramatic and
   unnecessary. We never found any evidence that our phones were tapped or
   that anyone's life was in danger".

   On another occasion, Woodward said the "most sinister pressure" he and
   Bernstein felt during Watergate "was the repeated denial" by Nixon's
   White House "of the information we were publishing" as the scandal
   deepened.

   <bold>University enrolments in journalism courses soared because of
   Watergate</bold>: It's an appealing subsidiary myth, that the Watergate
   exploits of Woodward and Bernstein, as dramatised by Redford and
   Hoffman, made journalism seem glamorous and alluring. So alluring that
   young Americans in the 1970s supposedly thronged to enrol on journalism
   courses.

   It's a myth that endures despite its thorough repudiation by scholarly
   research. One such study, financed by the Freedom Forum media
   foundation, reported in 1995 that "growth in journalism education"
   resulted "not from such specific events as Watergate… but rather to a
   larger extent from the appeal of the field to women, who have been
   attending universities in record numbers".

   The study was unequivocal in stating that "students didn't come rushing
   to the university because they wanted to follow in the footsteps of
   Woodward and Bernstein — or Robert Redford and Dustin Hoffman, for that
   matter".

   A similar study, released in 1988, declared: "It is frequently, and
   wrongly, asserted that the investigative reporting of Woodward and
   Bernstein provided popular role models for students, and led to a boom
   in journalism school enrolments."

   Instead that study found that enrolments already had doubled between
   1967 and 1972, the year of the Watergate break-in.

   <italic>W. Joseph Campbell is a professor at the School of
   Communication at American University in Washington, DC. He is the
   author of five books, including Getting It Wrong: Ten of the Greatest
   Misreported Stories in American Journalism (2010). He blogs about the
   myths of journalism at Media Myth Alert.</italic>

More on this story

     * Nixon's 'hatchet man' Colson dies
          + Published
            22 April 2012
     * Redford on politics, film and journalism. Video, 00:05:32Redford on
       politics, film and journalism
          + Published
            29 March 2012

Top stories

     * Live.
       'Like Armageddon': Five fires rage in Los Angeles, with whole
       communities destroyed
     * What's the latest on the LA fires, and what caused them?
          + Published
            1 hour ago
     * Pound falls to lowest in over a year as borrowing costs soar
          + Published
            1 hour ago

More to explore

     * Why are UK borrowing costs rising and what does it mean for me?
       A woman looks at her phone with a mug in hand inside her home
     * Before and after: How wildfires tore through LA
       A person runs past a building on fire
     * 'Where do I go?' Chaos on Hollywood streets as people flee flames
       Anna Waldman gestures a peace sign as she stands with her
       belongings and three dogs in a trolley.
     *
     * How Elon Musk seized on baseless memo claim to fuel wave of
       misinformation
       Elon Musk stares ahead. He is wearing a white open-necked shirt and
       a suit.
     * 'Constant stress': Families tell BBC of life in limbo due to
       housing crisis
       Mother Sam stands to the far left wearing a white T-shirt, cardigan
       and jeans. She has a short bob hairstyle. Next to her, sitting on
       the bottom bunk bed are her five sons all lined up together wearing
       tracksuits. Their father Jason is standing on the right wearing a
       navy hooded top. He has short grey hair.
     * Sound Of 2025: Ezra Collective on failed exams and keeping it real
       TJ Koleoso of Ezra Collective plays bass guitar
     * How Australia's beach cabana drama sparked a turf war
       Beachgoers are seen on the sand on Christmas Day at Bondi Beach in
       Sydney on December 25, 2024
     * The man who could become Canada's future PM
       Canadian Conservative Party leader Pierre Poilievre, wife Anaida
       and son Cruz arrive at the National Conservative caucus meeting on
       September 12, 2022 in Ottawa.
     * A politician was shot dead in Bangkok. Did another country do it?
       In this October 17, 2017 photograph, Lim Kimya, a member of the
       National Assembly from Cambodia National Rescue Party, speaks
       during an interview with AFP in Phnom Penh.

Elsewhere on the BBC

     * Ed Gamble hosts the official Traitors podcast
       Join Ed Gamble and guests as they dissect the first episodes of The
       Traitors!
       The Traitors: Uncloaked
     * Can art, music and words bind us in divided times?
       Simon Schama explores how artists have captured the transformations
       of British society since 1945
       Simon Schama's Story of Us
     * Enjoy a satirical smorgasbord of The News Quiz
       Digest a dramatic year of news as Andy Zaltzman revels in some of
       2024's funniest moments
     * The multi-award-winning legal drama returns
       Two years on, the Defoes are back and have gathered for a beautiful
       wedding in Barcelona
       The Split: Barcelona

Most read

    1. 1
       Russia keeping close eye on Trump's claim to Greenland
    2. 2
       Pound falls to lowest in over a year as borrowing costs soar
    3. 3
       Stuart Hogg given payback order for domestic abuse
    4. 4
       What's the latest on the Los Angeles wildfires, and what caused
       them?
    5. 5
       Truss legal threat to PM over claim she crashed economy
    6. 6
       Some councils ordered to increase home building by 400%, new BBC
       tracker shows
    7. 7
       How Australia's beach cabana drama sparked a turf war
    8. 8
       William wishes 'incredible' wife Kate happy birthday
    9. 9
       Paris Hilton and Adam Brody among celebrities to lose homes in
       wildfires
   10. 10
       Russell Brand fined after being caught speeding

BBC News Services

     * On your mobile
     * On smart speakers
     * Get news alerts
     * Contact BBC News

     * Home
     * News
     * Sport
     * Business
     * Innovation
     * Culture
     * Travel
     * Earth
     * Video
     * Live

     * Terms of Use
     * About the BBC
     * Privacy Policy
     * Cookies
     * Accessibility Help
     * Parental Guidance
     * Contact the BBC
     * Get Personalised Newsletters
     * Why you can trust the BBC
     * Advertise with us

   © 2025 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external
   sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
