   #HEROES IN THE NIGHT - Atom HEROES IN THE NIGHT - RSS HEROES IN THE
   NIGHT - Atom

   skip to main | skip to sidebar

HEROES IN THE NIGHT

Friday, July 23, 2010

Part 1- An Overview of Master Legend

   Ladies and gentlemen, By the Gods airways would like you to buckle your
   safety belts and make sure your seats are in an upright, locked
   position as we descend into our all night tour of Fist City and it’s
   most famous resident…MASTER LEGEND!
   The article “The Legend of Master Legend,” written by Joshuah Bearman
   and appearing in the January 2009 edition of Rolling Stone was my (and
   many other people’s) introduction to the concept of “real life
   superheroes.” Reading about that fascinating idea led me to seeking out
   my local RLSH, the Watchman and talking with him led me to forming the
   idea that I would like to write a book on this subject.
   After setting up a MySpace page for the book, I shortly received two
   very different e-mails. One was from someone telling me what a great,
   awesome guy Master Legend was and that I should get in contact with
   him. A second e-mail told me that Master Legend was a nutjob and they
   were sick of writers using him as a representative of the RLSH
   community.
   And so it has gone ever since. I have seen a large amount of debate
   online and heard many people’s opinions on the phone and in person.
   Because of this amount of controversy I have put off writing about the
   man here on my blog, but I feel the time is now to have a thorough
   discussion about him. My goal is to provide as fair of a representative
   of views supporting or criticizing him. In this first part, I will be
   presenting an overview of “pro” and “anti” statements I have seen
   repeatedly during my course of writing about RLSH.
   PRO-LEGEND
   -Tales of Comic Book Bravado and Crimefighting
   Something that appeals to some RLSH about Master Legend is that he is
   very dynamic and energetic. He is often documented running, jumping,
   and doing things like hitting the wall of his garage with a giant metal
   fist. He makes comic book exclamations like “By the Gods!” He threatens
   to give evil doers “an all night tour of Fist City!” His stories are
   wild, action packed, and never a snoozefest.
   Some of them are fantastic and we must take them at Master Legend’s
   word, since the only witnesses are Master Legend himself and the
   claimed league of frightened criminals who have had the misfortune of
   crossing paths with him.
   Here’s a recent blog post:

     There has been an evil doer in my town and you know I won't allow
     it. This guy known as Big Red has been terrorizing my homeless
     friends but now it's time to meet the Legend.
     This guy has tried to evade me because he knows of the whispered
     tales behind shuttered doors of Master Legend. He has a few punks
     that do crack, friends, so I got Brimstone to come along for
     mission: attack. I knew where he would be and right on time. He has
     been running his mouth out in the streets saying he can kick Master
     Legend's ass. I tell you this, he will need more Cheerios then the
     universe has.
     So yesterday (fellow Team Justice member) Brimstone and I made a
     quick approach in the Justice Van. We caught him hassling my friends
     red handed, so I told him "so you want to kick my ass, here’s your
     chance!" I threw off my shirt and slipped on my fighting gloves and
     said," alright boy you can run your mouth but can you run your
     fist!"
     Sorry to say the big lug ran for it. He got on his bike and zoomed
     away faster than I ever saw him go before- ha ha ha. It just goes to
     show you my friends that the bully is really a sissy inside. It is
     up to us all to stand against evil and destroy it. I know if we all
     work together we can.
     -“Master Legend Wards Off Dangerous Criminal,” June 28, 2010,
     MySpace blog

   It’s a good story, I see why people would like it. An evildoer is
   threatening the homeless, Master Legend shows up and scares him off,
   then parts with some good advice. If Big Red was hassling my homeless
   friends, I’d load up the Justice Van with Brimstone and go threaten to
   kick his ass, too. Big Red, if you’re reading this- Fist City.
   Master Legend’s energy and his war stories are contagious and has won
   him RLSH and non-RLSH fans alike.
   -Work with Team Justice
   Something that has been well documented are the things he does with
   Team Justice, which made RLSH history by becoming the first RLSH
   non-profit group. Along with his fellow team members Superhero, Lady
   Hero, Symbiote, Ace Diamond, Brimstone, and others, he has delivered
   food and supplies to Florida’s large homeless population. He very
   sensibly has handed out socks to the homeless. That may seem like a
   very minor thing, but if you are homeless in a climate like Florida’s
   clean socks aren’t just a matter of being more comfortable- they can
   literally be a life saver, preventing fatal disease. He has
   participated in Christmas time toy drives, charity events, and helped
   distribute flyers of missing children.
   These missions are well documented with photos and video which you can
   see at www.teamjusticeinc.webs.com
   -Acting as a Media Ambassador
   Besides the Rolling Stone article mentioned, Master Legend has
   attracted media attention from around the world and for many
   documentarians, flying to Florida is at the top of the list. I know for
   a fact he has been visited by two documentary film makers in the last
   two months and receives a steady stream of visiting journalists,
   authors, documentary film makers, and photographers. I have heard
   rumors that he has had interest from HBO about developing a show of
   some kind and strangely has even had talks about his own cooking show!
   Some RLSH say this media attention is not just good for Master Legend,
   but good for RLSH in general.
   Not only that, but Master Legend runs his own RLSH forum, leading a
   platoon at the Master Legend Army and recently began his own internet
   radio entry- The Master Legend Show.
   -Can Shred on Guitar
   One of America’s great exports (besides comic book superheroes) is rock
   n roll, and Master Legend likes to shred on the guitar as evidenced by
   video showing him performing with the band Alias Punch, as well as his
   own musical projects. Master Legend tells me his favorite guitar
   players are Randy California(Spirit, also played with Jimmy Hendrix),
   Eric Lifeson (Rush),and Jeff Beck (The Yardbirds).
   It stands to follow that Americans like superheroes, and they like rock
   n roll, so a rock n roll superhero who fights crime and can do a guitar
   solo is going to impress a certain amount of people.
   -Recognition From Local Law Enforcement
   In "The Legend of Master Legend," Joshuah Bearman reports that he got
   in touch with a local police Sergeant, who spoke favorably of Master
   Legend.

     (The) Sergeant, who’s in charge of vice investigations, took a
     chance and tracked Master Legend down. Based on the neighborhood, he
     figured, Master Legend might be a good local contact. “And sure
     enough,” the Sergeant tells me, “I start getting calls from Master
     Legend with information. And it checks out. Master Legend has helped
     put away a few criminals.”
     --“The Legend of Master Legend,” by Joshuah Bearman, Rolling Stone,
     Jan. 2009

   Additionally, a photo on MySpace shows Master Legend receiving a
   certificate of recognition from a police officer.
   ALSO ADDED: RLSHs tell me that Master Legend helped Florida residents
   in the aftermath of Hurricane Charly- "He helped cut apart trees on
   roads so relief trucks and traffic can get through. He was also pulling
   people out of their houses who were trapped."
   ANTI-LEGEND
   -Tales of Comic Book Bravado and Crimefighting
   The very thing that appeals to some people about Master Legend is what
   others use as a criticism- his storytelling. Many of his claims have no
   documentation and are outlandish.
   For example, in his article Joshuah Bearman writes about how Master
   legend and Justice Force (a pre-Team Justice) had a mission to “put the
   stomp on a child molester and his gang of crackheads.”

     “Master Legend has many more florid tales of adventure, some
     plausible, like retrieving a friend’s stolen money, others quite
     outlandish, like the child molester and his gang of crackheads. (For
     starters, doesn’t it seem like you’d have to be one charismatic
     child molester to attract an entire gang of crackheads to do your
     bidding?)”
     -“The Legend of Master Legend,” by Joshuah Bearman, Rolling Stone,
     Jan. 2009

   In another blog entry, Master Legend himself describes a confrontation
   he has in an alleyway with three criminals he encounters while give a
   homeless man blankets. After engaging them in combat he writes about
   how he wins the back alley brawl:

     I then see the first guy back at me so I throw a drop kick on him. I
     then take off my helmet and bash him in the head with it, by this
     time they hear the Legend yell as I go into Fist City mode. The one
     guy’s head is bleeding and (he) staggers off as the other two are
     back on me. I still use my helmet as my weapon. Then one whips out a
     knife so I quickly reach into my utility belt and grab a habanero
     pepper. I quickly chew it up while backing off then I snap kick the
     first one that charged. The guy with the knife slashes at me and I
     spit the pepper in his eyes. He hits the ground screaming I turn
     around and laid out about 20 punches on the other guy. Then ran back
     over to the guy with the knife and stomped it out his hand and even
     sprained my foot kicking him into the brick wall. –
     - “Fist City in the Scummy Alleyway,” Jan. 12, 2009, MySpace blog

   He goes on to say that he flees the scene when someone comes across it
   and says they are calling the cops. Master Legend says “call them” and
   gives the person his card before heading to a pizza joint and ordering
   pizza and beer. The police show up there and basically tell him to keep
   up the good work.
   So Master Legend triumphs over three armed street hoods using his WWII
   helmet and habanero pepper he has tucked in his utility belt. Do I have
   evidence this story is false? No, I don’t. But I will say if I tried to
   file this story as factual, I can tell you my editors most likely
   would:
   1. Check the calendar to see if it was April 1.
   2.Tell me to get out of their office, possibly permanently.
   -Claims of Metaphysical and Religious Powers
   Master Legend has claimed to have various metaphysical and voodoo based
   powers.
   From the "about me" section of his MySpace:

     I am a real life super hero born with a purple veil and certain
     psychic abilities and gifted with powers by a voodoo queen. I am
     here to help you and will put my life on the line to do so. Never
     hesitate to ask for my advice or for me to use my powers to help
     you.- MySpace

   In January 2010, Master Legend posted a message that he was the
   archangel Metatron. It first appeared at the Heroes Network, which led
   to him being banned from that forum. Here is the post in question:

     “I, the arch angel Metatron, am taking prayer requests. Do not be
     afraid and let me cast away demons and ailments in your life. God
     has told me I can do this at this time, so come to me with your
     troubles and I will help and it doesn't matter who you are.”
     -January 2010

   -Anti-Homosexual Comments
   Master Legend has received some controversy from statements he’s made
   regarding homosexuals. For instance, on March 4, 2010 Atavistik, a RLSH
   from Northern California posted a thread titled "RLSHSF- Meet at Pride
   Festival" at therlsh.net. He suggested that RLSHs in Northern
   California meet up for San Francisco's Gay Pride Fest.
   Master Legend responded to the thread:

     “Do you not see this is like a gateway drug to even worst (sic)
     immorality? I tell you this because I care and I can rest easy
     knowing I tried to warn you. I don't care if people want to hate me
     for being a man of the bible but the bible is not all my reason. Can
     you not see the sickness that leads to death? This is just horrible.
     You want to praise disgust and evil and call it freedom? What’s
     next, child molester pride day? Hey, it's freedom so that gives me
     the freedom to say the truth. I don't feel sorry for them or praise
     this. I also have the freedom to destroy this evil. I cannot believe
     that this is not seen.”
     -March 4, 2010

   -Allegations of Alcohol Abuse
   By this, I’m not talking about the fact the Master Legend drinks in the
   comfort of Legend Tower. Many people of all professions drink- police
   officers, doctors, ditch diggers- even RLSH bloggers.
   The allegations I am talking about are Master Legend drinking and then
   going on patrol or driving the Justice Van. I want to be very clear- I
   have no evidence that will back such an allegation up and will give
   full benefit of the doubt that these allegations are false until I see
   proof otherwise.
   The reason it has made this list is that I have heard these allegations
   not once, but several times.
   Posted by Tea Krulos at 8:28 AM
   Newer Post Older Post Home

Facebook Badge

   Heroes in the Night
   [AEn0k_v4Fe80KMGAhOTeAzODZaoywgLmces-eF0XkkhUdY4DcJQWiyrFb-35SnUoezngMg
   Zn-tEwgySzgPlycfLCaC4f4JWuCy91mBmHCGSklYARhoN2lNeQjuu0WaD4jUnN6tcpYGAzn
   ic=s0-d]
   Promote Your Page Too

WELCOME TO HEROES IN THE NIGHT!

   My name is Tea Krulos and I'm a freelance writer from Milwaukee,
   Wisconsin. I was introduced to the Real Life Super Hero(RLSH) story in
   late February, 2009. As a lifelong fan of comic books and unusual and
   unique people and subcultures, I was immediately hooked.

   I was determined to find a local RLSH if there was one and found The
   Watchman, a man who dons a red rubber mask, suit, and trenchcoat and
   patrols the streets of Milwaukee. I had a long, fascinating interview
   with him in person one night and determined that the short magazine
   piece I had successfully pitched did not scratch the surface of the
   story and decided to write a book. After a few months I also
   established this blog- both the book and the blog are titled Heroes in
   the Night.

   My book is based on extensive research, interviewing, and field work. I
   have traveled to meet RLSH in Minneapolis, Rochester (Minnesota),
   Brooklyn, Vancouver, Portland, Seattle, San Diego, New Bedford
   (Massachusetts) , and Washington DC, as well as meeting regularly with
   the Milwaukee crew.

   I have been quoted as an expert on the subject in the New York Times,
   Wall Street Journal, People magazine, Seattle Weekly, Scientific
   American, io9.com, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, and dozens of other
   newspapers, magazines, websites around the world. I've also made
   appearances on a dozen radio shows and have been filmed for three
   different RLSH documentaries.

   I have written articles on the subject for Milwaukee magazine, the
   Boston Phoenix, New York Press, Forces of Geek, Riverwest Currents, and
   Delayed Gratification.
   Heroes in the Night will be published in Fall 2013 by Chicago Review
   Press.

HEROES IN THE NIGHT LINKS

     * Pop Mythology reviews Heroes in the Night!
     * PRE-ORDER at Powell's
     * PRE-ORDER at Barnes & Noble
     * PRE-ORDER at Amazon
     * Heroes in the Night on GOODREADS
     * Heroes in the Night on FACEBOOK
     * Milwaukee Journal Sentinel Article
     * Mark Metcalf interviews Tea Krulos for Third Coast Digest
     * Forces of Geek Q &A w/Tea Krulos
     * Riverwest 24 Heroes
     * Hero-Gear
     * Real Life Superheroes.Org

Followers

Blog Archive

     * ►  2016 (1)
          + ►  March (1)

     * ►  2015 (1)
          + ►  June (1)

     * ►  2014 (9)
          + ►  October (1)
          + ►  July (1)
          + ►  April (1)
          + ►  March (2)
          + ►  February (2)
          + ►  January (2)

     * ►  2013 (48)
          + ►  December (4)
          + ►  November (4)
          + ►  October (12)
          + ►  September (5)
          + ►  August (11)
          + ►  July (7)
          + ►  June (4)
          + ►  April (1)

     * ►  2012 (44)
          + ►  December (2)
          + ►  November (2)
          + ►  October (2)
          + ►  September (1)
          + ►  August (3)
          + ►  July (2)
          + ►  June (2)
          + ►  May (6)
          + ►  April (12)
          + ►  March (5)
          + ►  February (4)
          + ►  January (3)

     * ►  2011 (126)
          + ►  December (8)
          + ►  November (10)
          + ►  October (9)
          + ►  September (7)
          + ►  August (9)
          + ►  July (8)
          + ►  June (9)
          + ►  May (20)
          + ►  April (7)
          + ►  March (15)
          + ►  February (15)
          + ►  January (9)

     * ▼  2010 (167)
          + ►  December (7)
          + ►  November (11)
          + ►  October (18)
          + ►  September (18)
          + ►  August (14)
          + ▼  July (19)
               o The Say Something Nice Thread
               o Yesterday was Thursday?
               o Center Street Patrol 07/24 and other news
               o HERO PROFILE # 38: Master Legend
               o Part 1- An Overview of Master Legend
               o Part 2- Testimonials and Criticisms of Master Legend
               o Part 3- A Q and A with Master Legend
               o Tomorrow- Master Legend
               o Major Linkage
               o Wired Magazine Picks Up Story
               o HERO PROFILE #37: Silver Sentinel
               o Shruiken' Ain't Easy
               o NEW YORK PRESS Article
               o Riverwest- July 9 Patrol
               o SHRUIKEN POLL
               o HERO PROFILE #36: Viper
               o RLSH WORLD NEWS
               o THE KRULOS ALL AMERICAN COMIC BOOK SALE
               o HERO PROFILE #35: Mega-Rad
          + ►  June (15)
          + ►  May (11)
          + ►  April (21)
          + ►  March (16)
          + ►  February (10)
          + ►  January (7)

     * ►  2009 (11)
          + ►  December (6)
          + ►  November (5)

About Me

   My photo

   Tea Krulos
          Tea Krulos is an award winning freelance writer from Milwaukee,
          WI. His first book is titled Heroes in the Night: Inside the
          Real Life Super Hero Movement.

   View my complete profile
