   top of page
     * Instagram - Grey Circle
     * Facebook - Grey Circle
     * Threads
     * YouTube - Grey Circle
     * Spotify - Grey Circle

   Logo of the Lakeshore Grounds Interpretive Centre featuring an
   illustration of a Passenger Pigeon in flight
   Accessibility
   About Us

Experience history.

   ____________________
   (BUTTON)
   Search...
     * HOME
     * VISIT
     * COLLECTIONS
     * PROGRAMS
     * EXHIBITIONS
     * LEARN
          + HISTORY
          + BLOG
     * More...

   Use tab to navigate through the menu items.
   LGIC_LOGO_colour.png

THE FILM HISTORY PROJECT

Interpretive Centre               BACK TO THE FILM HISTORY PROJECT
     Contributors

Urban Legend (1998)



Directed by Jamie Blanks

IMDB link

​Urban Legend was a teen horror movie set at the fictional Pendleton
University where a rash of murders are being committed 25 years after the
campus was the site of a massacre. The bizarre murders all resemble different
urban legends.



Warning: Page includes plot spoilers.

Filming on the Lakeshore Grounds

   Urban Legend-5-G as Stanley Hall.png
   Urban Legend-15-Phone at G entrance 2.pn

Humber College's G Building was the site of Stanley Hall, the supposed site
of a blood massacre in 1973, and Cumberland House serves as the fraternity
house.

​

When the film was in production in 1997, G Building had yet to be renovated
(it was the last of the fomer Lakeshore Psychaitric Hospital buildings leased
by  Humber College to be renovated; it re-opened in 2016). The derelict
building provided the perfect setting for the site of the boarded-up,
abandoned Stanley Hall. Wooden slats were placed across each window and the
site was only visited at night, often in stromy weather, adding  to the
mystique of the location.

G Building

   Urban Legend-8-Arches of G 2.png
   Urban Legend-24-Falling out G window 2.p

Humber College's G Building was the site of Stanley Hall where a bloody
massacre took place 25 years prior. Early in the movie, Natalie (Alicia Witt)
and Brenda (Rebecca Gayheart) talk about the legend of the Stanley Hall
massacre and dare one another to stand in the doorway under the arch on the
east side of the building and repeat the words "Bloody Mary" three times.
They jump when they hear moaning coming up from the boarded-up door.

​

Towards the end of the film Natalie (Alicia Witt) hears screaming coming from
Stanley Hall and climbs the south-eastern exterior of the building. She and
Paul (Jared Leto) then confront Brenda (Rebecca Gayheart), an argument which
results in Brenda falling out the second floor window over the archway of G
Building's east entrance.

​

When the film was in production in 1997, G Building had yet to be renovated
(it was the last of the former Lakeshore Psychiatric Hospital buildings
leased by  Humber College to be renovated; it re-opened in 2016). The
derelict building provided the perfect setting for the site of the
boarded-up, abandoned Stanley Hall. Wooden slats were placed across each
window and the site was only visited at night, often in stormy weather,
adding  to the mystique of the location.

Cumberland House

   Urban Legend-11-Cumberland Frat party.pn

The former residence of the Superintendent of the Lakeshore Psychiatric
Hospital, today known as Cumberland House, served as the fraternity house in
Urban Legend where a Halloween party is held.

Fun Trivia

Urban Legend was released only two years after the first of the Scream
trilogy films and received much negative criticism when the two were
compared. Both films feature a well-known group of young actors playing a
small group of friends who are overly familiar with the horror movie genre
and find themselves at the center of a series of bizarre murders. Like its
counterpart, Urban Legend did not hesitate to poke fun at itself:
Just prior to his death, Damon (Joshua Jackson) turns on the radio in the car
- the song playing is the soundtrack to his hit TV show, Dawson's Creek (Paul
Cole's "I Don't Want to Wait').
At the end of the film a group of students sit around talking about the
murders and debate whether or not they are an urban legend. One of the
students jokingly says that they "bet Brenda was the girl from the Noxzema
commercials" - which Rebecca Gayheart starred in.
When Paul (Jared Leto) and Natalie (Alicia Witt) break into Professor
Wexler's (Robert Englund) office, they spot a Freddy Kruger puppet; Englund
played Kruger in A Nightmare on Elm Street.

THE FILM HISTORY PROJECT

   LGIC_LOGO_colour.png

   Contact us:

   info@lakeshoregrounds.ca

   ​

   (416) 675-6622 ext. 3801

   ​
     * Black Instagram Icon
     * Black Facebook Icon
     * Threads
     * Black YouTube Icon
     * Black Spotify Icon

   © Lakeshore Grounds Interpretive Centre


   bottom of page
