   #Run of Play RSS Feed The Run of Play » The Legend of Arsene Wenger
   Comments Feed Victory from the Jaws of Triumph: Ireland’s Euro 2012 So
   Far Deus Absconditus alternate alternate

   The Run of Play
     * Home
     * About
     * Contact

   RSS

   The Run of Play is a blog about
   the wonder and terror of soccer.

   We left the window open during a match in October 2007 and a strange
   wind blew into the room.

   Now we walk the forgotten byways of football with a lonely tread,
   searching for the beautiful, the bewildering, the haunting, and the
   absurd.
     * EDITOR
       Brian Phillips
     * CONTRIBUTING WRITERS
       Zach Dundas, Fredorrarci, Alan Jacobs, Supriya Nair, Richard
       Whittall

   Contact Us
   [contact-form 1 'Contact form 1']
     * By Miriti Murungi
     * October 28, 2011
     * 49 Comments

The Legend of Arsene Wenger

   If Arsene Wenger’s career was a kung fu movie, we would be in the part
   where the search is on for the villain who poisoned Arsene’s rice.
   Taking cues from the charismatic Frenchman, all eyes would be on the
   usual suspects, the media, referees, disloyal players, Roy Keane, Sam
   Allardyce, and the most obvious targets, those pin-stripe-suited
   figures throwing around Scrooge McDuck money for fun. But this film’s
   twist is that Arsene may have stubbornly poisoned his own rice.

   Without question, Arsene Wenger’s footballing philosophy is the stuff
   of legends, the kind of stuff that inevitably leads to statues and
   shops with corny names. It is a presence in football that can’t quite
   be contextualized and fully appreciated until you run down a laundry
   list of coaches and realize how few have recognizable philosophies
   capable of lining up with the world’s great –isms, communism,
   socialism, capitalism, Barcelonaism. But as with all great –isms,
   there’s a downside, and Wengerism is no exception to this time-tested
   rule. As a great man who I may have made up once said, “Shifting
   landscapes wait for no philosophy.”

   Back in 1996, Wengerism took the world by surprise, and by world, of
   course, I mean England. Arsene was a career coach with multiple
   successes under his belt, but his body of work didn’t quite resonate on
   a global scale until he replicated his successes at Arsenal,
   transforming the club and English football along the way. His
   philosophy was built by tapping into a continental pool of players that
   had yet to be realized or trusted by his peers in England. Add the
   Japanese-inspired modifications to the traditional, English training
   regimen and some good old-fashioned outside-the-box thinking and the
   insightful Arsene was well on his way to transforming an English league
   that, in many ways, was in desperate need of modernization.

   Wengerism quickly became easily identifiable. Movement, pace, obscene
   technical ability, disregard for passports, and a dedication to healthy
   living collectively became Arsene’s ayahuasca (an Amazonian psychedelic
   drug thought to transform how you view the world). Over his first few
   years, England stood transfixed as if in a drug-induced state. The
   world inhaled. And then inhaled again. I certainly did. Multiple times.

   Few could outrun Wenger’s newest disciples, an amalgamation of good
   old-fashioned Englishmen, seemingly random foreigners, and a superhero
   Dutchman who was scared of flying. The trophies were immediate and
   people soon began lining up around the corner to devour the teachings
   on tap at Highbury. Suddenly, a Frenchman was the philosopher-king of
   English football. He was “The Professor,” the robed, noble Frenchman
   sitting on the side of the pitch with his Coke bottle glasses telling
   the world that the era of English football as we knew it was over.
   Fini.

   Mesmerized, slightly disoriented fans and media types weren’t the only
   ones to succumb to Wengerism. Arsene, susceptible to the trappings of
   success just like previous purveyors of transformative thought, also
   bought into Wengerism. And that’s where the trouble begins. No
   philosophy, not even the most transformative, should go unchallenged
   forever.

   Looking at the human record, there are countless examples of what
   happens when individuals develop philosophies that successfully end up
   radically transforming thought and/or behavior. Often, these typically
   charismatic figures peak, which is then followed by a slow procession
   into a delusional state characterized by a fierce bond to the glory
   days and a perpetual belief that a formula that was once all the rage
   will be so again. It’s just a matter of time, isn’t it? That’s the
   worrying and poisonous component of success. Sure, it’s not an
   absolute; it doesn’t cripple everyone. But Arsene’s steadfast reliance
   on a philosophy that initially brought success just might be the very
   poison that leads to his demise. Said another way, Arsene may have
   unknowingly betrayed himself.

   Arsene transformed football by keeping his mind open to new approaches
   and angles. He absorbed what leagues and cultures had to offer and hit
   the English scene at the right time, with the right recipe. But since
   then, one way to view Arsene’s stance is that he has stood still,
   staunch in his belief that his philosophy is the end. The irony is that
   this highly cerebral being may have reached a point of success only to
   discard the one thing that brought him success: an open mind.

   All philosophies must evolve, and like all hardened souls who have
   doubled down on their philosophies as gospel after initial successes
   learn, being right and successful at a specific point in time doesn’t
   make you right for eternity, or right under all conditions. The Arsenal
   philosophy worked with a certain set of players at a certain point in
   time in a certain market, almost to perfection. But unfortunately for
   Arsenal, we no longer live in that world. Arsene no longer has the jump
   on foreign markets. No longer are there remote corners of the globe.
   Globalization has arrived and what was once Wenger’s Coca Cola formula
   is now public knowledge. Now, the race for continental talent, the
   talent necessary to execute football “The Arsenal Way™,” can be
   purchased by anyone with access to mines, oil, or vast resources of
   chicken. No longer is Arsene’s spell, alone, enough to draw players who
   can now express themselves at much higher salaries elsewhere. Yet, for
   some reason, we still reflexively talk about sexy football at Arsenal.
   Why? If we are being honest, sexy football hasn’t been around for some
   time. All you need to do is look at the style that was on display at
   Highbury a decade ago (which admittedly is a high standard for any
   team) to see how the latest versions of the team are much closer to
   Inconvincible than Invincible. Check your bowl, Arsene may have
   poisoned your rice, too.

   We’re all wondering how this movie ends. Does Arsene take his own life
   by continuing to eat his poisoned rice, or is there another twist, a
   twist where the director reveals that Arsene has actually mastered
   skills taught at competing monasteries and defeats Manchester City in
   the final fight scene using Qatar-style?

   At first glance, changing Arsene may be as difficult a task as
   convincing Chairman Mao to accept capitalism, or convincing Richard
   Dawkins to accept Jesus as his savior. But regardless of what he
   decides, the landscape around him will continue to change. That is
   inevitable. It is also likely we will inevitably learn that training
   young players to compete The Arsenal Way™, only to break through and
   find out that other teams have already explored the world and brought
   in experienced players already capable of playing The Arsenal Way™
   while selling farm-raised Arsenal Way™ players to these same clubs is a
   suspect formula, and one that looks to be unsustainable.

   Arsene has a strong, commendable philosophy, but if he wants to
   continue being a savior and avoid end-of-career buffoonery and
   caricature, he must learn to proactively introduce experienced, serious
   talent into his team, or risk losing the reputation that he has spent
   his life rightfully developing. I wish it didn’t work that way. It
   isn’t fair. But it is 2011, and today, reputations are easier than ever
   to build. They are also notoriously easy to dismantle, bastardize and
   destroy.

   But it isn’t all doom and gloom. If you are wearing your prescription,
   rose-tinted glasses, the potentially good news is that Arsene already
   knows all of this. It has now come out that back when Arsenal was in
   desperate need for a goalkeeper, they bid £20 million for Liverpool’s
   Pepe Reina. They seemingly made bids for Borussia Dortmund playmaker
   Mario Götze, Lyon playmaker Yoann Gourcuff, Rennes holding midfielder
   Yann M’Vila, and maybe even Lille hotshot Eden Hazard. Each of these
   bids, and these are only some of the ones that have surfaced, would
   have broken Arsenal’s record transfer fee. These bids suggest one
   important thing: Arsene knows and he’s now willing to spend well beyond
   what he has spent in the past. Whether he’s willing to spend enough is
   another question. So the potentially good news for Arsenal fans is that
   Arsene’s poisoned rice may not kill him, but rather, might have
   strengthened his immunity and expanded his powers. He may just be
   waiting for the right moment in the movie to maintain the appropriate
   level of suspense. If this is the case, this kung fu movie may have one
   last hilarious, unexpected turn.

   In the meantime, keep your eye on your rice.

   Miriti Murungi can also be found at Nutmeg Radio, and @NutmegRadio.
     * Tweet this post
     * Share on Facebook
     * Email this post
     * Print this post
     * Share this post

   Read More: Arsenal, Arsène Wenger

The Legend of Arsene Wenger

   by Miriti Murungi · October 28, 2011
   [contact-form 5 'Email form']
     * Delicious
     * Digg
     * Google
     * FriendFeed
     * StumbleUpon
     * LinkedIn
     * Yahoo Buzz

Sponsors

     * Free Bet

About

   The Run of Play is a blog about the wonder and terror of soccer.

Search

   ____________________ Search Button

Subscribe

     * Subscribe via RSS
     * Follow us on Twitter
     * Follow us on Facebook

     * Copyright © 2007-2014 The Run of Play
     * Links
     * Archive
     * Advertise
     * Top
