   #Sunway Echo Media » Feed Sunway Echo Media » Comments Feed Sunway Echo
   Media » Why Are Arthurian Legends So Popular? Comments Feed JSON oEmbed
   (JSON) oEmbed (XML)
--

   Home Lifestyle Books Why Are Arthurian Legends So Popular?

--

Why Are Arthurian Legends So Popular?

   echo Leave a Comment on Why Are Arthurian Legends So Popular?
   Source
--
   It is wholly possible that you have come across an adaptation of
   Arthurian legend at some point in your life. After all, there have been
   so many interpretations across varying genres and media that an entire
--
   been deemed the most extensive and culturally important work based on
   Arthurian legends. This is because it goes in-depth into the histories
   of many characters, notably the more prominent Knights of the Round
   Table and Arthur himself. Le Morte d’Arthur has inspired other great
   works, such as T.H. White’s The Once and Future King. Arthurian legends
   have also been often referenced in parodies, such as Monty Python and
   the third Shrek movie. With all these different retellings of Arthurian
   legend, it becomes clear that they are widely celebrated even within
   pop culture. That leads us to the question, why are Arthurian legends
   so popular in the first place?

   The general storyline of Arthurian legends goes something like this:
   Arthur, guided by the eccentric wizard Merlin, obtains the legendary
--

   It is likely that Arthurian legends are popular due to its character
   archetypes and storytelling. Arthurian legends feature characters that
   possess distinct personalities or capabilities yet still leave a lot of
--
   characters. For instance, BBC’s Merlin series and 1974 French drama
   Lancelot du Lac. Many characters in Arthurian legends represent beloved
   archetypes commonly found in literature. As an example, King Arthur
--
   life and manages to ensure peace while he remains King. Archetypes can
   also be easily assigned to other characters in Arthurian legend. An
   example would be Merlin, who falls under the Mentor archetype. Equipped
--
   not exceptional to discover that numerous characters and plots resemble
   or overlap with that of Arthurian legends, which have served as models
   or inspiration for later works.

   Furthermore, Arthurian legends may be well-received due to the mystery
   involved. There is no definite storyline as Arthurian legends are
   pieced together from a number of different sources. There is no
--
   is shown as a benevolent healer who laid Arthur to rest at Avalon. As
   Arthurian legends are known to end on a cliffhanger (hence Arthur is
   known as the Once and Future King), it is generally agreed upon that
--
   temptations of filling in plot holes or exploring different parts of
   Arthurian legends may prove to be too alluring to withstand for
   storytellers. Apart from fiction, it is perhaps because we know so much
   yet so little of Arthurian legends that academic research on the very
   subject is still carried out today. As curator Dr ap Huw mentions, the
--

   Sure, Arthurian legends may be popular, but at the possible expense of
   angering Arthurian scholars and fans, are the legends actually
   important? The answer to this is subjective and depends on the
   audience’s opinions. Still, it cannot be denied that the legends are
   classics that illustrate an important piece of history, no matter
--
   snapshot of how and what people’s beliefs were like at the time.
   Arthurian legends have also been proved to withstand the test of time
   from mediaeval to the modern era. As mentioned, they have been revamped
--
   considerable significance and its enduring popularity demonstrates that
   the legends are still fully capable of attracting a sizable audience,
   old, young and anywhere in between. The many adaptations of Arthurian
   legends in the fantasy genre like C.S. Lewis’ The Chronicles of Narnia
   and even George Lucas’ Star Wars, undoubtedly attest to the legends’
   influence. Not only have they been featured heavily in fiction and
--
   to uncovering the real life counterparts of the settings in which
   Arthurian legends take place. In particular, it has been widely
   hypothesised that Avalon could in actuality be Glastonbury or Isle of
--
   for a sense of dignity and justice that seem to only exist in myth. The
   diverse interpretations of Arthurian legends also bring to light
   different aspects of the tale, such as the contrasting portrayals of
--
   storyteller’s perspectives.  What do you think of when it comes to
   Arthurian legends? Is it the memorable characters, the beautiful
   settings or the weighty symbolism? Do you have any theories of when
   King Arthur will rise again? Arthurian legends can mean many things to
   many different people. They evolve according to its audience and their
   expectations as well as understanding of the stories. Even so, it is
   evident that Arthurian legends remain compelling in the minds of the
   people. As the BBC reports, “Romantics may hope that, one day, Arthur
   will return to rescue his people. But if he lives on through his
   legend, the ancient monarch, it would appear, has never really gone
   away”.
