   France. The same is true of other genres of folklore : whether we are
   talking of riddles, proverbs, legends, or folksongs, it is difficult to
   find examples limited to just one region or one nation. They all have
--
   However, it was not to history that each group appealed during their
   confrontation, but to legend, in particular to divergent legends of
   Gargantua. The story also alludes to several other religious, comic and
   aetiological legends which would help listeners make sense of their
   local geography. Nineteenth-century folklorists were more interested in
--
   stories were being told at particular moments. But in Le Hérissé’s tale
   it is clear that legends were not just amusing pastimes, they had a
   function : it is this functional aspect that provides the link between
   a particular landscape and the stories told within it. Legends were
   mobilized as charters of ownership by the communities that told them.
--

   There is a whole cycle of Gargantua legends concerning this coastline,
   often associated with particular features such as Gargantua’s tooth
   near Saint-Suliac, or his finger at Fort La Latte (both prehistoric
   standing stones). Sébillot collected several Gargantua legends in
   Saint-Cast. [37] They did not concur in every detail, but it is
--

   Câtins and Jaguens told two contradictory legends about Gargantua and
   the Bourdineaux, but to what extent were either believed ? Belief used
   to be the test that folklorists applied to distinguish a folktale from
   a legend, the former being told as a fiction, and the latter as a true
   account. [41] However, it is difficult to see how anyone could
--
   figure of Jesus. (This may be a deliberately ironic counter-comment to
   the common legend of Breton piety in which a peasant refuses to strike
   a crucifix despite threats from Republican troops, and dies a martyr’s
--
   Hérissé’s audience could orientate themselves in the landscape :
   aetiological legends like that of Gargantua’s finger, and lieux-dits
   such as the Becrond, contained descriptions of landmarks which together
   formed a working map of the area. Legends were an informal education in
   significant geography : one learnt the boundaries of one’s community
   with one’s neighbours and, just as importantly, with the supernatural.
   Legends connected the vital history of the community to its
   environment. No Câtin fisherman could forget that his ancestors had
--
   parish would be beaten at each boundary marker, to help them more
   vividly their exact location. [59] Legends served a similar, if less
   painful function. They were the collective memory of the community.
--

   [41] Linda Dégh and Andrew Vázsonyi, “Legend and Belief”, in Dan
   Ben-Amos, Folklore Genres, Austin TX, 1976, pp.93-123.
--
   [61] Jacqueline Simpson, “Beyond Etiology : Interpreting Local
   Legends”, Fabula 24, 1983, pp. 227-8.

